The University only admits students to its undergraduate degree programs on a full-time basis. Students who have not been admitted to degree status at the University may register for classes in accordance with the policies and regulations outlined in the section of this chapter covering non-degree students.

The classification of students is determined by the number of quarter units completed with passing grades. Lower-division students are considered first-year if they have completed fewer than 44 units and sophomores when they have completed at least 44 units but fewer than 88 units. Upper-division students are considered juniors when they have completed at least 88 units but fewer than 131 units and seniors when they have completed at least 131 units.

If a student is enrolled for 12 or more units in a given term, they have full-time status for academic purposes. Students enrolled for fewer than 12 units have part-time status for that term and may not qualify for all University activities and benefits, such as eligibility for financial aid, on-campus housing, and intercollegiate athletic competition. Continuing enrollment at the University in part-time status requires approval by the Dean of Academic Support Services.

To be in good academic standing at the University, a student must normally be enrolled for 12 or more units, must maintain a cumulative grade point average of at least 2.0 based on all courses taken at Santa Clara, and must have completed at least a minimum number of units as specified below. Failure to meet these requirements may result in academic probation or disqualification from future registration at the University.

Students in their last term of enrollment before completing a degree may be classified, for academic standing purposes, as a full-time student when enrolled for less than 12 units.

Students at Santa Clara are subject to academic probation if their cumulative grade point average is lower than 2.0 based on all courses taken at Santa Clara.

Students are also subject to academic probation if they fail to make satisfactory progress toward their degree as defined below:

or

Students are subject to disqualification from further registration at the University for any of the following reasons:

or

Reinstatement to the University after disqualification is rarely permitted and requires favorable action by the Dean of Academic Support Services in consultation with the dean of the student’s college or school. Requests for reinstatement are made to the Dean of Academic Support Services and must include a description of any activities during the period of disqualification that would indicate that an improved academic performance can be expected in the future. A student generally may not apply for reinstatement within a year of the date of disqualification. The request for reinstatement will be considered only if the student’s academic deficiencies can be corrected within a reasonable time.