The Office of Campus Ministry supports the faith and spirituality of all students at Santa Clara University.  Because  the University is grounded in the Catholic, Jesuit traditions, we welcome people of all faiths - those seeking a deeper relationship with God through their own faiths, as well as people seeking meaning and connection in their lives.  The professional ministry staff members are committed to building a campus community and supporting the full humanity of all people by fostering spirituality, wellness, and belonging. In addition to six full-time campus ministers, the office includes student ministry interns, spirituality facilitators in the residence halls, and desk assistants who foster hospitality. Our stance in Campus Ministry reflects our shared Jesuit that our faith comes alive when we work for justice in the world.

We invite students to get involved with these ministries to explore their own faith, spirituality, and values.  Additionally, students can develop their own leadership skills by serving and leading in all program areas, as volunteers, or in one of a number of paid internships.

Yes! Student years are a particularly rich time for learning about ourselves and our world and practicing what it means to live our commitments of faith and value more justly in the world. Campus Ministry welcomes all SCU community members to deepen their spiritual practice, faith and  identity, regardless of their tradition or personal stance.

“The real measure of a Jesuit education is who our students become.   Tomorrow’s ‘whole person’ cannot be whole without a well-educated solidarity… . the whole person in solidarity for the real world.”  - Peter-Hans Kolvenbach, Superior of the Society of Jesuits, speaking at Santa Clara University, October 2000.

Our only focus is to support SCU community members to explore the connection between their commitments and their actions -  to practice living faith and values more authentically ‘to build a more humane, just, and sustainable world.’