The Activities Programming Board (APB) provides dynamic programming for the campus community. APB hosts events such as concerts, comedy shows, carnivals, movie nights, crafting events, and more. Past performances have included Macklemore, LMFAO, Walk the Moon, Chance the Rapper, Jimmy Eat World, Maroon 5, The Roots, Sum 41, Mos Def, Lupe Fiasco, Tyga, and Gym Class Heroes.

The Associated Student Government of Santa Clara University (ASG) is the representative body for undergraduate students addressing their needs, interests, and concerns. ASG is comprised of an Executive Cabinet, Student Senate, Judicial Branch, Community Development Committee, and Public Relations Committee. Student Senate meetings are held every Thursday evening and are open to all students.

Into the Wild provides students of all skill levels with opportunities to get off campus and explore California’s wilderness. Every week, Into the Wild organizes trips that include hiking, backpacking, camping, rock climbing, kayaking, rafting, surfing, and more. Into the Wild also aims to promote environmentally sustainable practices.

KSCU FM 103.3 is Santa Clara's own student-operated radio station. KSCU provides hands-on radio broadcasting experience to students and community members. The staff of KSCU operates all aspects of the radio station providing leadership opportunities in a variety of areas including music, budgeting, fundraising, promotions, management, and sports broadcasting.

The Multicultural Center (MCC) is the multicultural programming body and racial/ethnic advocacy voice for the campus community. The MCC is an umbrella organization for 16 clubs including the African Student Association (ASA), Asian Pacific-Islander Student Union (APSU), Barkada (Filipino), Chinese Student Association (CSA), Hermanas Unidas (Latina), Igwebuike (Black/Pan African), Intandesh (South Asian), Japanese Student Association (JSA), Ka Mana`o O Hawai`i, Korean Student Association (KSA), Latinx Student Union (LSU), Middle Eastern North African Club (MENA), Queer People of Color Association (QPOCA), Together for Ladies of Color (TLC), Undocumented Students and Allies Association (USAA), and Vietnamese Student Association (VSA). Membership in any of these student organizations is open to the entire Santa Clara community.

The Redwood is the University’s annual yearbook capturing the pictorial history of each academic year. Students may get involved with the yearbook through staff positions and volunteer roles in writing, design, photography, and management. Students at large are encouraged to participate by contributing photos and writings.

The Santa Clara is the University’s student newspaper. The paper is published several times per quarter during the academic year and can be found at newsstands at Benson Memorial Center and other campus locations. Additional stories and content can be found on The Santa Clara website.

The Santa Clara Community Action Program (SCCAP) is a community-based service organization dedicated to applying activism and justice to address social issues in and around the campus community. SCCAP promotes social awareness, leadership for social justice, and compassion. To get involved, students can volunteer with over 20 programs across four departments: On Campus Advocacy, Education & Mentoring, Neighborhood Perspectives, and Health & Disabilities.

The Santa Clara Review (SCR) is the University’s biannual literary magazine. Submissions are drawn nationally from students, staff, and community members. There are opportunities to contribute in the areas of poetry, fiction, non-fiction, art, and management. Students are encouraged to submit their pieces for publication in the Santa Clara Review as well as in the companion magazine titled The Owl.