The Cowell Center promotes a holistic approach to students’ physical, emotional, psychological, and interpersonal well-being. The Center’s counseling and medical staff are available when students believe that their well-being is being compromised in any way. Through Counseling and Psychological Services (CAPS), Student Health Services (SHS), Santa Clara University Emergency Medical Services (SCU EMS), and Student Health Insurance, the Cowell Center has a wealth of health and wellness resources to support students as they navigate the academic rigors at Santa Clara University.

Counseling and Psychological Services (CAPS) is staffed with a diverse team of licensed therapists, graduate-level psychological trainees, and mental health professionals dedicated to promoting students’ well-being through short-term therapy, crisis support, groups & workshops, and more. The multidisciplinary team is committed to the values of multiculturalism and social justice, and are dedicated to providing mental health services that are open to and accepting of every student we serve.

CAPS providers  strive to promote, enhance, and support students’ emotional and interpersonal well-being through a range of mental health services offered within a safe and confidential environment. In counseling, students work on a wide range of psychosocial and developmental issues such as depression, anxiety, interpersonal problems, disturbed sleep, eating behaviors, identity development, acculturation, academic motivation, homesickness, family concerns, intimacy, and sexuality. CAPS appointments are free of charge. Psychological services are also available 24/7/365. Services include a support line, therapy, and more. Students can call 408-554-5220 at any time to get support.

Student Health Services (SHS) is staffed with a physician, nurse practitioners, registered nurses, and medical assistants. A registered dietitian is available on a part-time basis. SHS provides high-quality on-site medical care including  diagnosis and treatment of illness and injuries,  a limited in-house medication dispensary , and medical referrals to specialists when needed. Medical visits to the Cowell Center’s Student Health Services range from $10 to $50 per visit for all students. Visit fees are in addition to all other nominal associated fees, such as the cost of medications, lab/blood tests, and supplies. For further information, see the Cowell Center website. When SHS is closed during the academic year, an advice nurse is available by phone for students at 408-554-4880. A volunteer student emergency medical group, SCU Emergency Medical Services (EMS) is also available after hours for  medical emergencies on campus during the academic year. SHS is closed from mid-June to mid-August.

SCU Emergency Medical Services (EMS) is a student-run organization that is based out of the Cowell Center. These students are known as Emergency Medical Technicians (EMTs) and offer emergency medical services to SCU students from 5 p.m. to 8 a.m. during fall, winter, and spring quarters.

All students are required to maintain health insurance coverage while enrolled at the University. Students will be charged for University health insurance unless they complete an online waiver verifying their own comparable insurance each academic year. Additional information can be found at scu.edu/cowell/insurance.