Professors Emeriti: Terry L. Beers, Phyllis R. Brown, James P. Degnan, Diane E. Dreher, Marilyn J. Edelstein, Ronald T. Hansen (Gerard Manley Hopkins, S.J., Professor), John C. Hawley, Charles T. Phipps, S.J., Fred D. White

Senior Lecturers Emeriti: Sherry Booth, Jill M. Goodman Gould, Robert Michalski, Cory L. Wade, Jeffrey L. Zorn

Professors: Michelle Burnham, Juliana Chang (Associate Chair), Eileen Razzari Elrod,  Juan Velasco-Moreno

Associate Professors:,Kirstyn Leuner, Amy J. Lueck, Cruz Medina, Danielle Fuentes Morgan, Aparajita Nanda, Julia Voss (Chair)

Assistant Professors: Supurna Dasgupta, Mathew Gomes, Kai Harris, Temptaous Mckoy, Daniel B. Summerhill, Heather Noel Turner, José Villagrana, Jessica Young

Senior Lecturers: Simone J. Billings, Stephen Carroll, Theresa Conefrey, Melissa Donegan, Kirk Glaser, Jacquelyn Hendricks, Jean-Pierre Lacrampe, Claudia Mon Pere McIsaac, Tim Myers, Robin Tremblay-McGaw

Lecturers:, Miah Jeffra, Maria Judnick, David Keaton, Denise Krane, Michael Lasley, Margarita Levantovskaya, Loring Pfeiffer, Maura Tarnoff

The Department of English affords students a rich undergraduate education in the liberal arts centered on literature, cultural studies, and writing. Critical, professional, or creative writing projects are integral to every course in the English major. Students and faculty in the English Department discuss and write about British, American, and global literature, technical and professional communication, new media, and film. A range of theoretical approaches are used, sometimes with a focus on visual rhetoric and cultural studies. The department also offers the Creative Writing Minor, which provides students with a coherent course of study in the writing of poetry, fiction, and creative nonfiction, and Professional Writing Minor, which focuses on the theories, ethics, and practice of writing in industry and public contexts. The English major and minors prepare students to read and write critically, to bring intellectual flexibility to academic and professional problems, and to enter the workforce as individuals with trained skills in analysis and self-expression.

In addition to fulfilling the undergraduate Core Curriculum requirements for the bachelor of arts degree, students majoring in English must complete the following departmental requirements:

Minor in English

Students must fulfill the following requirements for a minor in English:

Minor in Creative Writing

English majors: No more than two courses from the major may be used to fulfill these requirements.

Minor in Professional Writing

English majors: No more than two courses from the major may be used to fulfill these requirements.

The State of California requires that students seeking a credential to teach English in California secondary schools must have substantial experience supervising high school-age individuals, pass a subject-area examination in English. The teaching credential itself requires the completion of an approved credential program. Students who are contemplating secondary school teaching in English should consult with the English advisor for prospective teachers (Amy Lueck) in the Department of English as early as possible.

Note: Authors and topics listed in the following course descriptions are typical rather than definitive. They are not necessarily included in a specific course every time it is offered, and others not listed here may be included.

A two-course themed sequence featuring study and practice of academic discourse, with emphasis on critical reading and writing, composing processes, and rhetorical situation. The second course will feature more advanced study and practice of academic discourse, with additional emphasis on information literacy and skills related to developing and organizing longer and more complex documents. Themes address a variety of contemporary topics. Successful completion of CTW I (ENGL 1A) is a prerequisite for CTW II (ENGL 2A). (4 units each quarter)

A two-course themed sequence for students in the Honors program featuring the study and practice of writing and rhetoric, with emphasis on critical reading and writing, diverse composing processes and modes, and attention to the rhetorical situation. The second course features more advanced reading, writing, and analysis, with additional emphasis on information literacy and skills related to developing and organizing longer and more complex writing in a variety of modes. (4 units each quarter)

A two-course sequence focusing on a major theme in human experience and culture over a significant period of time. Courses emphasize either broad global interconnections or the construction of Western culture in its global context. Courses may address cross-cultural contact; nature and imagination; and other topics. Successful completion of C&I I (ENGL 11A) is a prerequisite for C&I II (ENGL 12A). (4 units each quarter)

Surveys canonical and marginalized works in cultural and historical context, examining how texts shape and reference each other and the consequences of technological change. (4 units)

Explores the relationships among literature, culture, and society, experimenting with techniques of reading, interpretation, and intervention, using methods drawn from different theoretical perspectives. (4 units)

Introduces students to the field of writing studies using methods drawn from different theoretical perspectives. Topics may include civic discourse and rhetorics of social justice; composition and multiliteracies; and visual rhetoric and principles of design. Prerequisites: CTW 1 and 2.  (4 units)

Introduces students to the genres of business writing. Students practice writing with an emphasis on audience, readability, and document design in the digital age. Prerequisites: CTW 1 and 2. (4 units)

This course explores different ways of defining and practicing rhetoric, looking at the rhetorical operation of voice, space, performance, and materiality, as well as familiar persuasive texts like speeches. We'll work with theories of rhetoric drawn from historical and contemporary, Western and non-Western, mainstream and marginalized traditions. The goal of this course is to encourage students to recognize and shape rhetoric in their own lives; to hone critical perspectives on the rhetoric that surrounds them; and guide their formation as rhetorical agents in the world.  (4 units)

Introduces students to the history and practice of publishing and editing, including recent digital forms. Students learn about textual editing, textual criticism, annotation, and collation as they produce an edition of a book. (4 units)

Introduces students to writing within and about STEM fields. Prerequisites: CTW 1 and 2.  (4 units)

Builds on learning in Critical Thinking and Writing courses to deepen familiarity with values, genres, and conventions relevant to particular disciplines such as STEM, Business, Humanities, Arts, or Social Sciences. Stresses research skills connected with analysis and rhetorical reading and writing skills, especially revision with close attention to audience and purpose. Assignments will reflect increased sophistication in critical reading and writing with a purpose for particular audiences. When listed as 28GL, the course offers a focus on global literature and culture . Prerequisites: CTW 1 and 2. (4 units)

Introduces students to an historical survey of American literature from its beginnings to the present. (4 units)

Also listed as ETHN 90. For course description, see ETHN 90. (4 units)

Introduces students to the study of African American literature. Also listed as ETHN 36. When offered as 35GS, this course offers a gender studies focus and is also listed as WGST 14. (4 units)

Introduces students to Latinx cultural, film, and literary traditions. Also listed as ETHN 21. (4 units)

Introduces students to the study of indigenous oral and written traditions, including contemporary works. Also listed as ETHN 11. (4 units)

Introduces students to Asian American literature. Also listed as ETHN 41. (4 units)

Introduces students to short stories, film, autobiography, and poetry from many cultural communities in the United States. Also listed as ETHN 70. When offered as 39GS, this course offers a gender studies focus and is also listed as WGST 16. (4 units)

Introduces students to British literature via historical survey, focusing on literature written before 1800. May be repeated when topics differ. (4 units)

Introduces students to British literature via historical survey, focusing on literature from the 1800s to the present. May be repeated when topics differ. (4 units)

Introduces students to the critical study of poetry and the challenging work of literary criticism and theory. Students will achieve a greater understanding, appreciation, and enjoyment of poetry through the practice of critical analysis.  (4 units)

Introduces students to key texts and concepts in the study of film, including movements and figures in cinema, essential terms and concepts in film history and criticism, and the technological, economic, and institutional history of the film industry.  (4 units)

Uses close reading of Shakespeare’s plays as the object of study for writing instruction focused on literary analysis. Prerequisites: CTW 1 and 2.  (4 units)

Introduces students to global literatures written in English and/or in translation, representing traditions of writing from non-Western cultures. (4 units)

This course will explore how literary art (stories, narratives) informs and shapes diverse human experiences of religion, particularly the Christian traditions in the East-Asian and Asian-American contexts. How have people in different social, economic, political, cultural, racial/ethnic and gender/sexual contexts experienced Christianity in diverse ways? How have literary works addressed complex human experiences of religion in unique ways? How would fiction, poetry, and film shape or reshape our conceptions of the Christian traditions and theological perspectives? We will read modern Japanese, Korean, and Asian-American narrative art on Christianity from diverse perspectives that range across cultural exchanges, socio-political upheaval, race discourse, body/gender, war and trauma, migration, and inter-religious dialogue. Students are invited to immerse themselves in the depths of religious and cultural discourse not only by interpreting these stories but also by reflecting on their own contexts and understanding of religion, culture, politics, race/ethnicity, and gender/sexuality. Prerequisite: Introductory level course (SCTR 1-19, TESP 1-19, or RSOC 1-19) or another course approved as fulfilling RTC 1 Core requirement. Cross-listed with TESP 78. (4 units)

This course explores the relationship between religions and literatures in different times and cultures—the influence of religion on literary works, and how literatures express major religious themes. We will explore a span of literary genres and cinematic works in the context of contemporary social and literary multiculturalism. Such themes as the identity and purpose of humanity, the problems of suffering, ethics, the quests for ultimate meaning/truth, the sacred and profane, and transcendence will be among the topics of focus. Students are invited to immerse themselves in cultural discourse not only by interpreting these texts but also by reflecting on their own understanding of religion, culture, politics, race/ethnicity, and gender/sexuality. (4 units)

Focuses on selected authors, works, and genres associated with the effort to extend political, social, and economic democracy.  (4 units)

Explores the development of lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, queer (LGBTQ) literature in the United States from the mid-19th century to the present. Texts may include novels, short stories, poetry, and drama. Also listed as WGST 34. (4 units)

Introduces students to the study of literature by and about women, with special attention to questions of gender in their social and historical contexts. When listed as 68AM, this course focuses on American literature and is also listed as WGST 56. When listed as 68GL, this course focuses on global literature. May be repeated when topics differ. (4 units)

A study of women of color writing in the context of their respective cultural and social histories. Analysis of the interplay of racial images. When listed as 69AM, this course focuses on American literature and is also listed as WGST 15 & ETHN 69. When listed as 69GL, this course focuses on  global literature. May be repeated for credit when topics differ. (4 units)

Writing and reading fiction in a combined craft class and workshop setting, focusing on the short story. This course provides instruction on how to read published stories as a writer, developing ideas for stories from a variety of sources, experimenting with the elements of fiction, and developing revision skills through the workshop process. Not repeatable. (4 units)

Writing and reading poetry in a workshop setting. This course includes finding and shaping materials for poems, experimenting with elements of craft and a variety of poetic forms, reading work by established poets for models, and developing skills to revise poems and evaluate other writers’ works. Not repeatable. (4 units)

Reading contemporary models of life writing and writing memoir, autobiography, and dramatic nonfiction in a workshop setting. Prerequisites: CTW 1 and 2.- Not repeatable. (4 units)

Innovative compositional techniques and experimental forms of creative writing, focusing on new writing methods rather than on traditional lyrical or narrative forms. Students read, listen to, and create different types of work, which may include sound poetry, graphic and “flash” narratives, hybrid text, and digital projects. Not repeatable. (4 units)

Reading, viewing and critiquing poetry, fiction, nonfiction, and art for publication in the Santa Clara Review, facilitated by student editors and a faculty advisor. Students are graded P/NP only. May be repeated for credit. (1 unit)

Explores particular authors, genres, literary or theoretical movements, or themes. May be repeated for credit when topics differ. (4 units)

Engages students in analysis and development of communication skills mobilized in the spirit of public interest. The course surveys significant genres (opinion pieces, mission statements, grant proposals, needs assessments) useful for addressing wide audiences and working within nonprofit settings. Students will often be asked to work with actual clients and stakeholders in the community and industry. Prerequisites: CTW 1 and 2. (5 units)

The course examines archives, museums and memorials as sites of public history and memory and engages students in analyzing and developing communication skills mobilized in the spirit of understanding and representing diverse histories. Students will often be asked to work with local sites and stakeholders on campus and in the community and to engage with broader publics through the composition of physical and digital exhibits and other public-facing projects. Prerequisites: CTW 1 and 2. (5 units)

Students work in teams to prepare and submit a proposal and grant application to solicit funding for a local service agency, arts organization or community organization. They deliver a report to the group for whom they prepared their proposal which details the team’s processes, defines their strategies and justifies their decisions. Instruction focuses on developing students’ ability to think strategically, analyze professional documents to discover purposes and values, communicate effectively with diverse audiences, and work collaboratively to solve problems, prepare documents and give presentations. Prerequisites: CTW 1 and 2. (5 units)

Students will explore the history and public remembrance of Mission Santa Clara and the Native village of Thamien on which it is built. We will seek to understand how this history is researched, communicated, and remembered by examining: How missions are currently represented and remembered among public audiences (via SCU’s website, on campus, etc.); the Ohlone history that is not being shown, and the role of different kinds of evidence available for recovering it; and how we might intervene in this representational/memory work by using digital media. Cross-listed with ANTH 149. Prerequisites: CTW 1 and 2. (5 units)

Designed to introduce students to workplace writing, the course focuses on documents common in the field of professional writing, highlighting flexible rhetorical strategies useful to professional writers. Prerequisites: CTW 1 and 2.  (5 units)

Special topics course in writing and rhetoric. Topics may include stylistics, histories of writing and rhetoric, cultural rhetorics, science writing, feminist rhetorics, etc. May be repeated for credit when topics differ. Prerequisites: CTW 1 and 2. (5 units)

Prepares prospective teachers at all school levels (elementary, secondary, and post-secondary) and from all disciplines for their responsibilities in the instruction of writing. Topical focuses vary based upon instructor but typically include writing process theory, writing across the curriculum theory and best practices, use of emergent technology in writing instruction, etc. Prerequisites: CTW 1 and 2. (5 units)

Examines how people learn to read and write across history, cultures, technologies, and modes. Explores theories about literacy, equity, and ethics as well as literacy practices of particular groups. Prerequisites: CTW 1 and 2. (5 units)

This course will examine the ways variously positioned women have used writing to accomplish individual, interpersonal, professional, and civic goals in their lives and communities. We will be examining women writers as rhetors--recovering specific women and groups as theorists and practitioners of rhetoric--and composing rhetorical histories that help others to understand the work of women writers. Course may be repeated for credit when topics differ. Also listed as WGST 167AW. (5 units)

An examination of American life stories, theoretical texts, and films. Final project is an original film proposal and trailer. Prerequisites: CTW 1 and 2. (5 units)

An examination of global life stories, theoretical texts, and films. Final project is an original film proposal and trailer. Prerequisites: CTW 1 and 2. (5 units)

An examination of sustainability stories, theoretical texts, and films (both documentary and popular film). Final project is an original film proposal and trailer. Cross-listed with COMM 137S. Prerequisites: CTW 1 and 2. (5 units)

Instruction and practice in the close reading of STEM texts as well as writing within and about STEM fields. May be repeated for credit when topics differ. Prerequisites: CTW 1 and 2.  (5 units)

Introduction to major issues raised by internet-mediated community and sociability, including such issues as the proliferation of sub/counter-cultures, privacy and surveillance, circulation of ideas and media, and relationships between political/social action in online and offline spaces. The use, function, design, and implications of digital texts/objects and media are central to this class, and students will create digital projects that engage them with coding, design and other aspects of technological creation. Prerequisites: CTW 1 and 2. (5 units)

A writing studio course focused on multimodal writing: students will explore new media writing genres with special attention to their theoretical significance. Prerequisites: CTW 1 and 2. (5 units)

Students use community participatory research methods as tools for designing and collaboratively implementing community writing programming with partners in surrounding communities. Prerequisites: CTW 1 and 2.(5 units)

Introduces students to the field of technical communication, presenting best practices and principles of technical writers as well as surveying typical projects presented to technical communicators (crafting instruction manuals, designing internal documents for team-based projects, etc.). Prerequisites: CTW 1 and 2. (5 units)

Teaches students how to apply best practices related to writing center theory as they develop effective one-on-one relationships between writers and themselves. Seniors need permission from the instructor. Students can only take either 113EL or 113, not both. Prerequisites: CTW 1 and 2.  (5 units)

Students volunteer one-on-one with writers in the community through an Arrupe placement while learning how to challenge social power structures created by language usage expectations. Seniors need permission from the instructor. Students can only take either 113EL or 113, not both. Prerequisites: CTW 1 and 2.  (5 units)

Study of, and extensive practice in, reading and writing professional prose with an emphasis on the changing forms of professional writing (webtexts, social media writing, etc.) as well as essential tools for professional writers (editing, document design, project management, etc.). May be repeated for credit. Prerequisites: CTW 1 and 2.  (5 units)

This course focuses on argumentative and persuasive writing. Prerequisites: CTW 1 and 2.  (5 units)

Gears whirl and type clicks into place as students create hand-pulled editions on SCU’s 100-year-old letterpress. Explore concepts of close reading, critical making, and graphic design through field trips, guest speakers, and hands-on activities that challenge our dependence on all things digital. This course culminates in a portfolio of handmade student work that engages in a critical conversation about our perceived need for (digital) speed. Cross-listed with ARTS 138. (5 units)

Study of selected linguistic concepts to better understand the origins and structure of the English language with particular attention to the evolution of language across time. May be repeated for credit when topics differ. (5 units)

Study of selected American films organized by theme or time period. (5 units)

Study of selected global films organized by theme or time period. (5 units)

Interdisciplinary study of film with a focus on gender and sexuality. Topics may include, but are not limited to, feminist and queer film theory, women filmmakers, lesbian/gay cinema, and constructions of gender in popular film. May be repeated for credit when topics differ. Also listed as WGST 134. When offered as ENGL 122AW/WGST 134AW, this course counts for Core Advanced Writing. (5 units)

Study of some major ideas and debates in literary theory and criticism, as they have developed historically, concerning the ethical potential and responsibilities of literary and cultural texts and of their writers and readers. (5 units)

Exploration of one or more major movements in recent literary and cultural theory, such as Marxism, feminism, deconstruction, reader response, New Historicism, cultural studies, postcolonial theory, narrative theory. (5 units)

Study of 20th- and 21st century feminist literary theory and criticism. Intersectional examination of influences of gender on reading and writing literature and understanding culture. Also listed as WGST 163. (5 units)

Builds on learning in Critical Thinking and Writing courses to deepen familiarity with the values, genres, and conventions relevant to research about literary and cultural studies, exploring topics like pop culture, wellness/disability, citizenship, et cetera from critical perspectives. Course focuses on original research and the genre of the scholarly argument. Stresses writing and research as social and recursive processes by embedding students in a community of researchers/writers composed both of their peers within the course and discourse communities of scholars/commentators. Formerly ENGL 106. Prerequisites: CTW 1 and 2.  (5 units)

Also listed as THTR 161 and ETHN 136. For course description see THTR 161. (5 units)

Study of selected works from the beginnings of American literary history up to the 19th century. Writers, genres, and topics vary. (5 units)

Study of selected American works from the 19th century. When listed as 132GS, this course offers a gender studies focus and is also listed as WGST 164.. May be repeated for credit when topics differ. (5 units)

A study of selected works by particular American authors. May be repeated for credit when topics differ. (5 units)

Study of selected works in African American literature. May be repeated for credit when topics differ. Also listed as ETHN 130. (5 units)

Studies in Latinx literature, film, and cultural studies. May be repeated for credit when topics differ. Also listed as ETHN 124. (5 units)

Study of selected works in Indigenous literature. Also listed as ETHN 111. When listed as ENGL 137GS, this course offers a gender studies focus and is also listed as WGST 110. May be repeated for credit when topics differ. (5 units)

Study of selected works in Asian American literature. May be taken more than once when topics differ. Also listed as ETHN 145. (5 units)

Literary study of an issue, theme, or genre in American literature. When listed as ENGL 139GS, this course offers a gender studies focus and is also listed as WGST 165. May be repeated for credit when topics differ. (5 units)

Medieval literature in its political, religious, historical, social, and cultural contexts. May be repeated for credit when topics differ. (5 units)

Renaissance literature in its political, religious, historical, social, and cultural contexts. May be repeated for credit when topics differ. (5 units)

The literature of Britain during the long 18th century (1660–1830) in its political, religious, historical, social, and cultural contexts. When listed as 144GS, this course offers a gender studies focus and is also listed as WGST 141A. May be repeated for credit when topics differ. (5 units)

The literature of England from 1830 to 1902, in its political, religious, historical, social, and cultural contexts. May be repeated for credit when topics differ. When offered as 145EL, this course counts for CE & ELSJ in the core. (5 units)

A study of selected works by particular British authors. May be repeated for credit when topics differ. (5 units)

Historically grounded courses investigating British literature with different issues, themes, and genres. May be repeated for credit when topics differ. (5 units)

A study of British drama. May be repeated for credit when topics differ. Also listed as THTR 111. (5 units)

British, American, and world poetry, fiction, and drama since World War II. May be repeated for credit when topics differ. When offered as 150EL, this course counts for CE & ELSJ in the core. (5 units)

Study of Shakespeare’s tragedies. May be repeated for credit when different plays are taught. Also listed as THTR 116. (5 units)

Study of Shakespeare’s comedies. May be repeated for credit when different plays are taught. Also listed as THTR 117. (5 units)

Exploration of issues and themes in Shakespeare’s writings. May be repeated for credit when topics differ. Also listed as THTR 118. (5 units)

This course examines how Shakespeare's works form, channel, and contest ideologies of race, social class, religious chauvinism, and gender and in both the early modern era and our present moment. Key topics include anti-blackness, geohumoralism,  colonialism, caste, biological reproduction, monogenesis, blood lineage, pedigree, and embodied difference. (5 units)

Interdisciplinary study of gay and lesbian cultures and critical theory with a focus on U.S. perspectives. May be repeated for credit when topics differ. Also listed as WGST 136. (5 units)

Interdisciplinary study of gay and lesbian cultures and critical theory with a focus on global perspectives. May be repeated for credit when topics differ. Also listed as WGST 122. (5 units)

Also listed as ETHN 131. For course description, see ETHN 131. (5 units)

Study of the natural world and its representations in American language and cultures. (5 units)

Study of the natural world and its representations in global languages and cultures, in English or in translation. (5 units)

Study of literature in the context of postcolonial theory and criticism. (5 units)

Thematic study of African literature in translation or written in English with attention to non-Western traditions of writing and to historical and social contexts and/or genre. (5 units)

Thematic study of South Asian literature in translation or written in English with attention to historical and social contexts and/or genre. (5 units)

Thematic study of Caribbean literature in translation or written in English with attention to historical and social contexts and/or genre. (5 units)

Study of the theory and practice of children’s literature with special attention to the history of children’s literature, the debate over the kinds of texts best suited for teaching reading, and multiculturalism. (5 units)

Literary genres of the Bible (myth, history, wisdom, prophecy, gospel) studied in translations from the Hebrew and Greek against the background of Mesopotamian, Babylonian, Egyptian, Hellenistic, and Roman cultures. (5 units)

Exploration and analysis of central connections between religious and ethical questions, concerns, topics, and movements and their literary expressions in different social, cultural, individual, historical, geographical, and/or political contexts. When listed as 162GS, this course offers a gender studies focus. (5 units)

Also listed as THTR 172. For course description see THTR 172. (5 units)

Also listed as THTR 112 or 113. For course description see THTR 112 or 113. (5 units)

Also listed as THTR 185. For course description see THTR 185. (5 units)

Studies in literature by and about women. When listed as 168AM, this course offers a gender studies focus and is also listed as WGST 167. When listed as 168GL, this course offers a global focus. May be repeated for credit when topics differ. (5 units)

Study of literature by and about women in explicitly theoretical contexts. When listed as 169AM, the course offers a focus on American literature and is also listed as WGST 166. When listed as 169GL, this course offers a focus on global literature. May be repeated for credit when topics differ. (5 units)

Workshop in writing and illustrating children’s and young adults’ books. (5 units)

Writing fiction, with emphasis on the short story. May be repeated for credit. Prerequisite: ENGL 71. (5 units)

Workshop in the writing of poetry. May be repeated for credit. Prerequisite: ENGL 72. (5 units)

Introduction to the fundamentals and format of screenplay writing. Critical analysis of characterization and narrative structure in contemporary movies, as well as workshops in the writing of film treatments, outlines, and scripts. May be repeated for credit. Also listed as THTR 173. Prerequisite: ENGL 71 or permission of the instructor. (5 units)

Development of skills in the elements of creative nonfiction, such as narration, character development, persona, and voice. Focus is on one or more modes of creative nonfiction, such as landscape writing, popular culture, literary journalism, profile, and memoir. Prerequisites: CTW 1 and 2.- (5 units)

Explores the intersections of creative writing, social justice, and vocation with special attention to issues of poverty and homelessness. Students will read and write creative prose and poetry, have a brief community placement, and learn from several guest speakers. (5 units)

Introduction to and practice in planning and drafting works of genre fiction (such as historical, science fiction, magical realism, fantasy) for an adult or young adult audience. (5 units)

Students will experiment with writing and performing in a range of styles, such as spoken word, storytelling, flash fiction and collaborative performances, poetry and music, and monologues. The course will culminate in a student performance. (5 units)

Also listed as THTR 171. For course description see THTR 171. (5 units)

Also listed as THTR 170. For description, see THTR 170. May be repeated for credit when topics differ. (5 units)

Focus is on effective written and oral communication specifically targeted for engineers in the industrial environment. Major topics include audience analysis, document design, revision, the design and use of graphics, ethical issues in communications, multimodal communication methods, and oral presentation techniques. Open primarily to junior and senior engineering majors. Prerequisites: CTW 1 and 2.- (4 units)

Applied introduction to designing, iterating, managing, and testing digital projects across modes and platforms for professional purposes (including industry, non-profit, and public sector). Internship is on-site, guided by professional writing faculty. Students will conduct user-experience research and generate content for SCU affiliated websites and social media accounts, generating a portfolio of work to document their learning, and showcase their skills. Enrollment is by permission: use this form to apply (http://bit.do/ENGL_189). (2 units)

Special topics in English, American, or comparative literature for senior English majors. Enrollment by permission of instructor. (5 units)

Peer educators are invited by faculty to work closely with them, facilitating learning in a lower-division course. May be repeated for credit by permission of the instructor. (2 units)

Specific authors, genres, literary or theoretical movements, or themes. May be repeated for credit when topics differ. (5 units)

Work-study program for students of superior writing ability who gain course credit by supervised writing for newspapers, magazines, or for government or private agencies. Enrollment is by permission or invitation of the director of internships and department chair. May be repeated once for credit. Students are graded P/NP only. (1–5 units)

For students of superior writing ability, intensive practice preparing work for publication under the supervision of distinguished writing faculty. Students should have significant work in progress. Enrollment is by permission or invitation of the instructor and the department chair. May be repeated once for credit. Students are graded P/NP only. (1–5 units)

In special circumstances and with permission of the department chair, a student may request a course in directed reading or writing from an instructor. May not be taken in a subject listed in this Bulletin. (5 units)