The Experiential Learning for Social Justice (ELSJ) component of Santa Clara’s Core Curriculum cultivates social justice, civic life, perspective, and civic engagement. To echo the words of Fr. Kolvenbach: “ELSJ provides Santa Clara students with opportunities for experiencing the gritty reality of the world, thinking critically about the world, responding to its suffering, and engaging it constructively.”

The majority of courses satisfying the Core ELSJ requirement are offered by University academic departments and programs. However, students may also satisfy the requirement through the following courses:

Enrolled students will participate in a pre-approved Ignatian Center immersion in advance of the course. Coursework will allow students to reflect on the immersion experience and explore what it means to live in solidarity with our local and global community. Students will strengthen their ability to work sensitively and respectfully with communities that are socially, economically, and/or politically marginalized or oppressed. Course assignments include critical reflections and an academic research paper. Enrollment by permission only. Permission must be granted by the ELSJ Faculty Fellow in advance of beginning the immersion experience. (1 unit)

This course will explore what it means to live in solidarity with our local and global community. Students will strengthen their ability to work sensitively and respectfully with communities that are socially, economically, and/or politically marginalized or oppressed. Enrolled students will participate in a weekly community-based learning placement through Arrupe Weekly Engagement or a similar program where students are engaged with communities. Note: This course requires participation in community-based learning (CBL) experiences off campus. (2 units)

This course will expose students to social realities and injustices both locally and internationally, providing an understanding of the complex relations between privileged and marginalized groups. Through reflection, self-assessments, course speakers, Career Center resources, and a community-based learning placement, students will be able to articulate their interests and talents and the applications to particular needs in the world. Students will be given the tools and resources to pursue a career direction and make life decisions that are personally meaningful and socially beneficial. This course is appropriate for students in any major. Note: This course requires participation in community-based learning (CBL) experiences off campus. (2 units)

This course will explore what it means to live in solidarity with our local and global community. Students will strengthen their ability to work sensitively and respectfully with communities that are socially, economically, and/or politically marginalized or oppressed. Enrolled students will participate in a weekly community-based learning placement through Arrupe Partnerships for Community-based Learning, SCCAP, or a similar program where students are engaged with communities. Note: This course requires participation in community-based learning (CBL) experiences off campus and membership in one of the eight RLCs.

This course provides a theoretical, vocational, and legal doctrinal foundation for students interested in social justice law. The assigned reading offers an opportunity to consider the relationship between law and social justice in several different contexts, including the structure of the legal profession and the delivery of legal services; the efforts to achieve social justice and civil rights through litigation in areas such as work, subsistence, housing, voting, and education; the problem of access to courts and the role of the judiciary; and the role of lawyers working with community movements to affect social change. To ground these theoretical explorations in real-life practice, this course features a community-based learning component, enabling students to interact with real people for whom these issues matter. This course satisfies both the ELSJ requirement and the Civic Engagement requirement, and qualifies as part of the Social Justice Pathway in the University’s Core Curriculum. Note: This course requires participation in community-based learning (CBL) experiences off campus. (4 units)

This course offers a comprehensive foundation in theoretical, vocational, and legal aspects of social justice law. Through assigned readings, students delve into the intricate relationship between law and social justice across various contexts, including the legal profession's structure, civil rights litigation in areas like work, housing, and education, access to courts, and the role of lawyers in community movements. The inclusion of community-based learning allows students to engage with real-life scenarios, fulfilling the Core ELSJ requirement and contributing to the Social Justice Pathway in the University’s Core Curriculum. Note: Participation in off-campus community-based learning experience (CBL) is required. (4 units)

Introduces keywords and concepts in social entrepreneurship; business plans and technology strategies used in this field; economic sectors in which social entrepreneurship has been applied; and tools for reflection upon personal vocation. Prepares students for a summer immersion experience with social entrepreneurs, and for conducting ethnographic research overseas by developing the social and technical skills they will need to work with these enterprises. Enrollment restricted to those selected as Miller Center Lewis Family Fellows. (5 units)

This course draws upon field experiences of Miller Center Lewis Family fellows and creates opportunities for reflection on their own personal development as leaders, and in the art and science of research. Weekly seminars will consist of fellows presenting their own research and reflections upon their vocation. Research projects will analyze the social impact of the entrepreneurs' work and the role technology plays in providing social benefit. Students will complete their summer research project analysis, present it in a public forum, and reflect upon their experience of engaging with the communities served by social entrepreneurs, and the implications for their own vocation. (5 units)

This course exposes students to ethical issues in a clinical setting. Students spend five hours per week completing rotations at O’Connor Hospital. In addition, students meet biweekly to discuss health care ethics. Prerequisite: Students must complete the application process and be accepted into the internship program. (5 units)

This course will explore what it means to live in solidarity with our local and global community. Students will strengthen their ability to work sensitively and respectfully with communities that are socially, economically, and/or politically marginalized or oppressed. Enrolled students will participate in a weekly community-based learning placement through Arrupe Weekly Engagement or a similar program where students are engaged with communities. Note: This course requires participation in community-based learning (CBL) experiences off campus. (2 units)