Senior Lecturer: Jessica Kuczenski (Chair)

Lecturers: Matthew Gaudet, Katia Moles

Associate Professor: Fatemeh Davoudi

Assistant Professor: Junho Park

The School of Engineering, under the leadership of the chair of general engineering, offers a major in general engineering, a minor in general engineering, and a minor in technical innovation, design thinking, and the entrepreneurial mindset. The bachelor of science degree in engineering is designed to provide students a technical degree with concentrations designed to meet the needs of the individual student. Not intended for a student who plans to work as a professional engineer, the general engineering degree allows a student to earn a technical degree while preparing for work or graduate study in fields such as law, medicine, business, or education.

In addition to fulfilling the undergraduate Core Curriculum requirements for the bachelor of science degree in engineering, students majoring in engineering must complete the minimum number of units and the specified requirements for their concentration.

Students majoring in engineering must complete a minimum of 189 units and the following requirements:

English

Mathematics and Natural Science

Engineering

Design Sequence

With permission, you may alternatively choose from one of the following options:

Electives

Students must fulfill the following requirements for a minor in general engineering:

Program Coordinators: Christopher Kitts, Jessica Kuczenski, Prashanth Asuri

To solve the complex and interdisciplinary technical challenges of the modern world, students must understand the entrepreneurial methods appropriate for harnessing technical innovation in order to create value through new devices, products, systems, processes, services, and ecosystems. This minor addresses this need by providing students with learning experiences that address product innovation, business fundamentals, and entrepreneurial thinking; in doing so, it leverages themes and concepts promoted through movements such as design thinking, lean development, and business modeling. In addition, an experiential learning activity in the context of the entrepreneurial development of a real engineering system is required. Participation in an elective component is also required.

This minor program is suitable for undergraduates in a wide variety of disciplines. It places an emphasis on an understanding of the user and the business environment for the design and implementation of technologies and solutions that are appropriate, affordable, and accessible for consumers in a variety of markets. Students who complete the program will be able to adapt both themselves and the organizations in which they work in a way that will allow them to remain competitive and relevant as global consumer trends continue to evolve.

The minor includes requirements in the areas of Product Innovation and Prototyping, Business and Commercialization, and Design Thinking and Entrepreneurial Fundamentals. Students are also required to complete an experiential project putting these concepts into practice as well as participation in two elective activities. Multiple options are available for each of these requirements, affording students a great deal of flexibility in completing the minor.

Currently, the Minor offers an optional BioInnovation and Design track to provide students with an opportunity to focus their study of innovation and design/entrepreneurial thinking to medical and health care applications.

Completion of the minor requires satisfying the requirements listed below. Track-specific requirements are noted in each requirement category.

Product Innovation and Prototyping (5 units minimum)

Select one of the following options:

Business and Commercialization Fundamentals (4 units minimum)

Select one of the following options:

Design Thinking and Entrepreneurship Fundamentals (4 units minimum)

Select one of the following options:

Experiential Activity (5 units minimum)

An academically supervised, hands-on engineering activity that includes entrepreneurially oriented tasks relating to the development of an appropriate business/enterprise model for a real engineering product/system.

Select one of the following options:

Elective Component

Participation in additional Pathway, course, or co-/extra-curricular activities within the School of Engineering’s program in innovation and entrepreneurial thinking. Complete any two of the following program opportunities:

Program Coordinator: Jessica Kuczenski

The Grand Challenges Scholars Program (GCSP) at SCU is designed to attract students who are excited about pursuing answers to challenges that face humanity and making the world a better place for all. The GCSP is a nationally recognized program offered as part of the National Academy of Engineering (NAE). With this program, NAE has sparked ‘a global movement’ driven by its aspirational vision which calls for engineering to serve people and society by working towards the “continuation of life on the planet, making our world more sustainable, secure, healthy, and joyful”[1]. This aspirational vision is well-aligned with SCU’s Jesuit Mission and values, empowering our students to improve and enhance their leadership skills and increase their social/global awareness.

The SCU GCSP program is open to all students in good academic standing. Criteria for selection are founded upon a student’s demonstrated willingness to work and commit themselves to the elements of the GCSP. Specifically, the student must meet the following:

Applications will typically be reviewed at the end of fall quarter. GCSP Application event typically available during fall quarter to become more familiar with GCSP and the application. Questions about the program or application process can be directed to the GCSP Director via email (jkuczenski@scu.edu).

GCSP Experiences

Each Grand Challenges plan must satisfactorily address the five Grand Challenges competencies required by the GCSP. Furthermore, scholars will work to connect their plan and GC experiences thematically through a specific Grand Challenge (one of the fourteen) or a chosen GCSP theme (Health, Sustainability, Security, Joy of Living). Please note that any single experience cannot be used to demonstrate multiple competencies in the GCSP, e.g. senior design capstone cannot be used to fulfill both Talent and Interdisciplinary competencies, though longer term meta experiences could be parsed and used to demonstrate multiple competencies. Details for each Grand Challenge competency is as follows:

1. Talent

The goal for this requirement is ensuring that depth of understanding and exposure to at least one Grand Challenge Area is attained by each scholar. Therefore, all GCSP scholars will be required to participate in an approved research or project-based experience related to a Grand Challenge area. Research and projects can be individual or team based with a scope that is commensurate to the number of scholars involved. This project will have a sustained duration of one academic year or other similar significant time period, such as a full time summer project. An estimated total of greater than 150 hours is expected.

Some examples of the experiences that may support student development of the Talent Competency include participation in formal undergraduate research programs, capstone design projects, or other significant research experiences such as Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REUs) sponsored by NSF and the like. To be an approved project, the scholar must submit a description of the project including the scope, anticipated learning objectives, and a narrative of the broader impacts of the student’s participation in the project.

2. Multicultural

Multicultural awareness is necessary for working effectively in an increasingly interdependent world. Participating in this competency area will deepen a student’s consciousness and motivation to bring technical knowledge to bear on global problems. This experience could be overseas or in an underserved domestic community. It may also be fulfilled through core curriculum as part of the Experiential Learning for Social Justice coursework. As a Jesuit University, SCU has a broad array of opportunities available to the students through our Global Engagement Office. A list of these opportunities include:

To ensure significant breadth and depth of experiences, credit for the Multicultural GC competency assumes a minimum of 6 weeks full-time experience or at least one quarter (10 weeks) of part-time experience.

3. Interdisciplinary Experience

Bridging engineering to other disciplines is essential for solving the NAE Grand Challenges. SCU experiences, as part of its Jesuit liberal arts background, are designed to build connections amongst fundamental science, mathematics, and engineering, but also amongst different fields of engineering, the arts, humanities, and social sciences, among others. All SCU students spend at least ~25% of their credit hours on liberal arts coursework as part of our Core Curriculum and must complete a Pathway. Pathways are clusters of courses with a common theme that provide an opportunity to study that theme from a variety of disciplinary or methodological perspectives. The purpose of the Pathway is to perceive connections, complexities, and relationships among ideas and a student’s educational and life experiences.

All GCSP scholars will be required to fulfill the Interdisciplinary competency through completion of two of the following:

4. Social Consciousness

The purpose of this competency area is to work with the people and organizations that are most strongly affected by the Grand Challenges now and in the future. In addition, a sense of caring and compassion for all people of all classes and abilities is an important attribute of someone who will be designing solutions that affect many different types of people. Each GCSP scholar will participate in a significant service oriented activity which requires the equivalent of at least 30 hours of community service work and which may potentially include:

5. Viable Business/ Entrepreneurship

The combination of entrepreneurship and innovation is central to promoting growth and technological development in our society. Santa Clara University recognizes the value in engaging students in the process of translating innovation into practical solutions that make a difference in people’s lives through entrepreneurship as it has two related minors offered through the Leavey Business School and the General Engineering program within the School of Engineering. Furthermore, SCU has existing  Centers of Distinction including the Miller Center for Social Entrepreneurship and the Center for Innovation and Entrepreneurship. In addition, SCU is a long-time member of the Kern Engineering Entrepreneurial Network (KEEN) with faculty dedicated to the inclusion of entrepreneurial thinking in their offered coursework and design experiences. Finally, SCU often offers hackathons and pitch competitions which feature entrepreneurial themes throughout the academic year.

We will leverage these curricular and extracurricular programs to ensure students understand and display a basic level of achievement in this Grand Challenges competency area. Unless specifically stated otherwise below, significant breadth and depth of experiences for these activities is required to be a minimum of 10-hrs of focused work with a submitted summary reflection of learning gains from each activity and its connection to the scholar’s chosen GC theme. Students are required to complete one of the following:

General Engineering offers a combined degree program leading to a bachelor of science and a master of science in one of the school’s MS programs. Under the combined degree program, an undergraduate student begins taking courses required for a master’s degree before completing the requirements for a bachelor’s degree and typically completes the requirements for a master of science within a year of completing the bachelor’s degree.

Undergraduate students admitted to the combined degree program are required to enroll in the program between February of their junior year and December of their senior year. Students in this program will receive their bachelor’s degree after satisfying the standard undergraduate degree requirements. To earn a master’s degree, students must fulfill all requirements for the degree, including the completion of 46 units of coursework beyond that applied to the bachelor’s degree. The program of studies for the master’s degree may include up to 20 units taken while enrolled as an undergraduate student; however, no individual course can be used to satisfy requirements for both the bachelor’s degree and master’s degree.

This course provides an introduction to engineering, including fundamentals of engineering study, different engineering disciplines, and interdisciplinary aspects of engineering. This course investigates the connection between science, technology, and society, and also illustrates the extent to which engineering impacts the world. The course also exposes students to entrepreneurship, engineering professionalism, the growth mindset, emerging markets, ethics, and civic engagement. ENGR 1 and ENGR 1L together fulfill the Science, Technology & Society core requirement. (1 unit)

The laboratory will provide students with hands-on experience of engineering design and open-ended problem solving. The lab focuses on introducing aspects of the different engineering disciplines and allows students to gain experience with each of the engineering disciplines and reflect on learning gains with teamwork, communication, and engineering skills. Engineering designs will be framed to include the impact of design solutions/technologies on society and will be developed in a team-based environment utilizing visuals, written text, and oral presentation. ENGR 1 and ENGR 1L together fulfill the Science, Technology & Society core requirement. (1 unit)

Introduction to prototyping in the engineering design framework. Students will work to design and prototype projects on four major pieces of Maker Lab equipment, which they will be trained to use. Prerequisite: ENGR 1L. (2 units)

First course in a two-course sequence that examines the connections between technological innovation and the common good across different cultures and historical periods. Exploring global case studies, students identify elements, and explore the complexity, of the cultures examined through course modules on significant objects, texts, ideas, issues, and/or events in historical context related to technology and the common good. Students examine both shared and diverse human experiences across cultures to connect the relevance of the past to the cultural present, as well as to personal worldviews, cultural assumptions, and values, in probing technology and the common good. Course will satisfy the Cultures and Ideas 1 requirement. (4 units)

Second course of the two-course sequence that examines the connections between technological innovation and the common good across different cultures and historical periods. Exploring global case studies, students identify elements, and explore the complexity, of the cultures examined through course modules on significant objects, texts, ideas, issues, and/or events in historical context related to technology and the common good. Students examine both shared and diverse human experiences across cultures to connect the relevance of the past to the cultural present, as well as to personal worldviews, cultural assumptions, and values, in probing technology and the common good. Course will satisfy the Cultures and Ideas 2 requirement. (4 units)

This course will draw upon the resources of Catholic theology and African Ubuntu theology to help students explore their own perspectives on the purpose and use of technology in the modern world. Intended for engineering students and others who are interested in entering into the design and development of technology, this course will invite students to develop their own set of tech values that inform how they will both use and design contemporary technology, by exploring foundational questions about the nature of humanity, society, and creation. ENGR 16 satisfies the RTC 1 core requirement. (4 units)

Making the case for constructive ethical application of the most powerful technologies of the 21st century. Normative, principle-based ethical analysis of current and emerging technology in arenas including information, energy, biotech/medicine, military science, robotics, and agriculture. ENGR 19 satisfies the Ethics Core requirement. (4 units)

Participate in a project-based, hands-on engineering project in a team-based environment. Gain exposure to sensing, actuation, and control techniques and components in the process of developing a robotic system or subsystem. Prerequisite: Instructor permission required. (1 unit)

The purpose of the course is to teach students how to be intentional and proactive in creating relationships with professionals from scratch. Students will also learn outreach best practices, how to conduct an effective career conversation, how to follow-up, and how to sustain a professional relationship over time. As a result of the course, students will strategically expand their professional network, learn more about potential career paths in their field of interest, increase self-confidence related to career, and learn the professional skills needed to access the hidden job market. Occasionally cross-listed with ASCI 10. (1 unit)

The ‘Introduction to Industrial and Systems Engineering’ course provides a comprehensive overview of the field of Industrial and Systems Engineering (ISE). It introduces students to the fundamental concepts, principles, and methods used in ISE, with an emphasis on their application to the design, analysis, and improvement of systems. (4 units)

This course explores the twofold 21st-century challenges of the use and conservation of electric energy, and the sustainable generation of electric energy, primarily through the use of photovoltaic cells. The course includes a study of issues relating to the environment, economics, politics, and societal impact. Although physical and mathematical studies and analyses are a part of the course, no background in these areas is required beyond algebra. ENGR 60 satisfies the Science, Technology & Society Core requirement. (4 units)

This course emphasizes the exploration and application of strategies to minimize waste and enhance the value stream in diverse settings, including both manufacturing and non-manufacturing contexts. Case studies drawn from healthcare, construction, information systems, and business organizations serve as the basis for in-depth analysis and collaborative team projects. Key topics covered are: an overview of analytical Six Sigma, the Toyota Production System, Value Stream Mapping, the identification of 7 Wastes, implementation of 5S principles, Just-in-Time practices, Total Productive Maintenance (TPM), and the philosophy of Kaizen. Introductory R programming language will be used for analytical sections. (4 units). (4 units)

Subjects of current interest. May be taken more than once if topics differ. (1–4 units)

Workshop to develop aspects of an engineering school sponsored entry into an external competition (examples include Solar Decathlon and Tiny House). May include design, communication, construction, research, analysis, planning, documentation, fundraising, and other activities. Students will meet together to share information, brainstorm, collaborate, and make decisions, and will also work independently or in small teams in focused areas. (1 unit)

Independent study of an approved engineering problem and preparation of a suitable project report. (1–4 units)

Student teams are partnered with a local community business or organization and complete a design project from problem identification through final prototype. Course focuses on “hands-on” experience in project management, building cross-disciplinary team skills, and prototyping (training and use of the SCU Maker Lab included). This course is open to students at all levels and all majors (engineering or non-engineering). Come make a real difference in a real community! Satisfies the Civic Engagement Core requirement. (3 units)

This course examines challenges surrounding STEM (Science, Technology, Engineering, and Math) education such as funding, diversity, and accessibility. Students develop or enhance STEM curricular materials and explore pedagogical techniques specific to working with youth from marginalized communities. Students taking ENGR111 and ENGR 111L will satisfy the ELSJ Core requirement. Corequisite: ENGR 111L. (2 units)

Students lead engineering-focused STEM activities with K–12 students at a community partner’s off-campus site. No specific engineering expertise is required or expected. Corequisite: ENGR 111. (1 unit)

The Biomechanics of Work course is designed to provide students with a comprehensive understanding of the principles of biomechanics as they apply to the design and evaluation of work. The course focuses on the analysis of physical work activities with an emphasis on reducing the risk of injury and improving performance and productivity. Topics covered in the course include anthropometry, work physiology, manual material handling, repetitive motion, work-related musculoskeletal disorders, and the design of workstations and equipment. The course also introduces students to various methods for assessing physical work demands, including direct observation, video analysis, and the use of force and motion sensors. (4 units)

The ‘Advanced Human Performance Modeling’ is designed to provide students with a comprehensive understanding of the principles and techniques used to model human performance. The course focuses on the development and application of mathematical and computational models to predict and analyze human performance in various work systems. Topics covered in the course include cognitive modeling, physical modeling, task analysis, workload assessment, and performance prediction. The course also introduces students to various software tools used for human performance modeling. (4 units)

Engineering for social benefit. Introduction to the following concepts: humanitarian and frugal innovation, design for empathy, needs assessment, impact evaluation, and social entrepreneurship. (1 unit)

Students explore and apply the 10 core competencies of frugal innovation through case studies applied to mobile applications, low-cost diagnostics, frugal habitat, last-mile distribution and micro entrepreneurship, and learn how to design technologies and business models for social benefit. Student projects focus on real-world implementations with social enterprises in emerging markets. Prerequisite: Junior standing or sophomores with instructor consent. (2 units)

This class offers vital tools for completing projects in unfamiliar communities and/or cultures. Students will learn how to read and understand the human and environmental ecosystem where they and their projects are immersed, and incorporate this information into their design process to develop solutions that are socially, economically, and environmentally appropriate. Students will also learn how to implement a quick “need assessment evaluation” to uncover the scope, depth, impact, and local perception of the need they will solve, while familiarizing themselves with approaches and tools for problem-solving and innovation. Prereq: junior standing. (2 units)

This course focuses on the intersection of diversity, inclusion, and product or service innovation. Build understanding and skills to work with diverse perspectives and competencies from intersectionalities of race, gender, religion, region, and other dimensions of diversity, and derived from historical American systemic ideologies of individual freedom and success within a hierarchy as an individualistic mindset and of social responsibility with justice for all as a relational mindset in oneself, and in other individuals, organizations, systems, and cultures. Learn entrepreneurship and design thinking prototyping techniques while working in teams on innovation challenges that can change the world. Students will explore user-centered design by developing and applying design processes and strategies in hands-on exercises, design critiques, discussions, lectures, and readings. ENGR 140 satisfies the Diversity Core requirement. (4 units)

The course equips future innovators with the ability to discern more compelling answers to where innovations and value are needed and why by cultivating confidence in applying theological inquiry to innovation. ENGR 141 satisfies the Religion, Theology & Culture 2 Core requirement. (4 units)

The limits of scientific knowledge are examined in the framework of nonlinear system theory, metamathematics, and modern physics. The technical background developed in the course is used as a basis for exploring the relationship between science, aesthetics, and religion. Particular emphasis is placed on the rationality of faith, and on controversial questions where the views of scientists and theologians appear to conflict. ENGR 143 satisfies the Religion, Theology & Culture 2 core requirement. Prerequisite: MATH 12 or 31. (4 units)

Design of innovative smart electromechanical devices and products. Topics include a review of the basics of mechanical, electrical, and software design and prototyping, and will emphasize the synthesis of functional systems that solve a customer need, that are developed in a team-based environment, and which are informed by the use of methodologies from the fields of systems engineering, concurrent design, and project/business management. Designs will be developed in the context of a cost-constrained business environment, and principles of accounting, marketing, and supply chain are addressed. Societal impacts of technical products and services are reviewed. Enrollment is controlled in order to have a class with students from diverse majors. Prerequisites: Core Foundation-level natural science and mathematics, or equivalent; instructor permission required. Cross-listed with MECH 144. Co-requisite: ENGR 144L. (4 units)

Laboratory for ENGR 144. Cross-listed with MECH 144L. Corequisite ENGR 144. (1 unit)

This course will explore technological innovation by studying the evolution of technologies and industries in Silicon Valley. We will review the development of fundamental technologies such as vacuum tubes, semiconductors, and biotechnology, and systems such as radar, communications, aerospace, personal computing, the internet, social media and platforms. This approach will help students to understand 1) the defining features of this region and how it has continued to lead in global technology development even as the fundamental technologies have changed, and 2) the complexity of the innovation process and the influence of the public sector, academia, investors, and other entities on innovation and entrepreneurship. (4 units)

This course examines the fundamental scientific and technological underpinnings of the important new field of nanotechnology; how both the understanding and the technological capabilities have evolved over the past century; and how nanotechnology proposes new applications that can address social and economic goals. An appreciation of the interaction between these goals and the evolution of the technology will be central to the course. Students will develop critical thinking about the prospects for nanotechnology in order to be able to assess the relevant ethical and social issues, and also the possibility and/or likelihood of the development of specific applications. ENGR 160 satisfies the Science, Technology & Society Core requirement. (4 units)

This course introduces students to the skills, practices, and processes for understanding and managing innovation and entrepreneurship activities that span cultures throughout the world. These cultural challenges include developing a deep understanding of the needs of customers in emerging markets, producing goods and services with global teams, and outsourcing manufacturing operations. ENGR 161 satisfies the Cultures & Ideas 3 Core requirement. (4 units)

Systems thinking represents an important tool for analysis and problem-solving, especially when collaborating with others from diverse perspectives, both within and outside of engineering disciplines. The course will introduce students to basic concepts of thinking in systems by providing exposure to and experience with modeling methods from both systems dynamics and general systems theory. (1 unit)

This is the first course in a two-course sequence taken in conjunction with a senior capstone course and relates elements of the capstone experience to themes that are fundamental to entrepreneurial thinking. Activities are framed from the point of view of a business model in which explicit elements of an engineering enterprise are defined, such as customer segments, the value proposition, etc. To be immediately followed with ENGR 163B. (0.5 unit)

This is the second course in a two-course sequence taken in conjunction with a senior capstone course and relates elements of the capstone experience to themes that are fundamental to entrepreneurial thinking. Activities are framed from the point of view of a business model in which explicit elements of an engineering enterprise are defined, such as customer segments, the value proposition, etc. Taken immediately following ENGR 163A. (0.5 unit)

An introduction to the basics of obtaining initial and early-stage financial support for a new entrepreneurial venture. The course reviews financial sources, pitch decks, term sheets, negotiation tactics, and how to create the perfect pitch for obtaining financing. (1 unit)

Creative confidence is foundational to human-centered design thinking, innovation, and entrepreneurship. In this interdisciplinary course, students strengthen skills in creativity and innovation through empathy gathering, photography, storytelling, improvisation, music, art, and prototyping. (1 unit)

The basic principles of design thinking, especially as applied to the three essentials for innovating success - user desirability, technical feasibility and business/economic viability. Explores techniques relating to themes such as deep customer understanding, creative brainstorming, and active prototyping.  These topics are applied in the context of a team-based project conducted through the ENGR 166 A and B course sequence (1 unit).

The basic principles of design thinking, especially as applied to the three essentials for innovating success - user desirability, technical feasibility and business/economic viability. Explores techniques relating to themes such as deep customer understanding, creative brainstorming, and active prototyping.  These topics are applied in the context of a team-based project conducted through the ENGR 166 A and B course sequence. Prerequisite: ENGR 166A (1 unit).

This course for engineering undergraduate students reviews essential concepts for new entrepreneurial ventures to include the customer discovery phase, channels of distribution, strategic partners, and monetary metrics. (1 unit)

This course for engineering undergraduate students identifies legal risks facing new ventures and reviews techniques and approaches on how to reduce these risks while accomplishing business or engineering goals. (1 unit)

This course focuses on learning about the role and significance of innovation in social entrepreneurship, and on exploring the various types of innovation that social enterprises may leverage. The course provides students with hands-on experience in an organization offering service to underserved populations. This service-based learning engagement will demonstrate an understanding and appreciation of the entrepreneurs engaged in these social businesses. The course introduces Social Entrepreneurship and develops an understanding of business models tied to financial sustainability and scalable social impact. This course is pending ELSJ approval to satisfy the Experiential Learning and Social Justice core requirement. The course fulfills the ELSJ core requirement. (2 units)

Through theater games, improvisation, warm-up exercises, monologue, and scenes, students will learn the basics of Stanislavski’s method of physical actions to learn the basic principles of acting and in the process increase self-confidence and the ability to collaborate. (1 unit)

This course focuses on identifying and assessing opportunities for new products and services. Based on the principles of design thinking, it addresses the identification of problems by reviewing methods for understanding the needs and motivations of the customer. It also reviews the development of a validated and solution-independent need statement. (1 unit)

This course introduces product prototyping strategies to allow students to test their design concepts with customers with the objective of validating assumptions regarding customer need and desired functionality/features. Prerequisite: ENGR 171A or instructor permission. (1 unit)

This is the first course in a two-course sequence in which students will explore an emerging technical market and develop specific viable business models to execute within the SCU educational program. Students will explore applications for the selected technology, identify customers/markets, and define a sustainable business model. Preferential admission may be given to students who have taken other courses in the school’s innovation and entrepreneurship program. Prerequisites: sophomore standing or above, and instructor permission required. (1 unit)

This is the second course in a two-course sequence in which students will explore an emerging technical market and develop specific viable business models to execute within the SCU educational program. Students will explore applications for the selected technology, identify customers/markets, and define a sustainable business model. Prerequisites: ENGR 172A and instructor permission. (1 unit)

This course serves as an introduction to fundamental business topics, to include basic economics, business forms and functions, reading simple financial statements, basic marketing concepts, and management concepts. The course includes participation in an online business simulation. Prerequisite: sophomore to senior standing only. (1 unit)

This course develops an understanding of financial statements and how they may be analyzed to assess the performance of an enterprise. The course also reviews capital markets and associated decision making for corporate operation. A business simulation allows students to apply principles of management, operations, marketing, and accounting to a business scenario. Prerequisite: ENGR 173 or instructor permission. (1 unit)

This course introduces students to the Business Model Canvas as a framework for describing and organizing the operational elements of a functional enterprise, whether it is a commercial or nonprofit entity. Topics include identifying customers and explicitly stating the value proposition, identifying value delivery mechanisms, articulating strategic partnerships, identifying key resources, and describing anticipated cash flow. (1 unit)

This course reviews the strategic segmenting/targeting/positioning and practical messaging skills used in product marketing and thought leadership positions, which are core to entrepreneurial technology ventures. Specific topics include an overview of core marketing skill sets, practical examples of successful market segmentation and target selection, best practices for positioning and messaging creation, competitive landscape modeling and developing differentiation, translating customer requirements into effective positioning/messaging, and wholesale market (re-)definition. (1 unit)

This course for engineering undergraduate students provides an overview of United States intellectual property (IP) laws, focused specifically on how those laws impact and apply to engineers. (1 unit)

Intrapreneurship is a form of corporate entrepreneurship, and it focuses on the needs of an established organization (unlike a startup) to create an innovative business opportunity within the existing structure of the organization. (1 unit)

Introduction to the design, operation, deployment, piloting, and safety issues involving the use of underwater robots. Prerequisite: Instructor permission required. (1 unit)

Technical operation, maintenance, and advanced piloting of underwater robots. Crew management. Operational and safety procedures. Prerequisite: Instructor permission required. (1 unit)

This course serves as foundations of reliability analysis and offers a comprehensive overview of risk analysis tailored for engineering students. It emphasizes essential methods commonly applied in engineering practices. Topics cover the introduction and explanation of practical concepts and techniques integral to reliability and risk studies, fostering in-depth discussions about their application. The course focuses on constructing probabilistic risk assessment models to assess and quantify risk in engineering and management systems. Various models will be used for quantifying risks, exploring analytical solutions, and employing simulation techniques. Given the societal and human behavioral aspects of many risk challenges, the course also delves into human risk perception, effective communication strategies for non-technical audiences, and considerations for intelligent adversaries. Practical applications in business, engineering systems, critical infrastructure, defense and security, cybersecurity, and health systems will be explored using tools such as Matlab, statistical modeling, and applications of Artificial Intelligence. (3 units)

This course focuses on the definition and practical applications of Six-Sigma quality systems across design production, engineering applications, and business processes. Key areas of focus encompass statistical methods within quality control and assurance, effective implementation strategies, and the application of practical engineering techniques to achieve ongoing quality improvement. It also addresses defect reduction, as well as quality-related project planning and management methods geared towards fostering universal participation in the continuous improvement of processes. Through a combination of hands-on and project-based learning, students will gain proficiency in applying various quality analytics methods to construct statistical models using the R programming language. Prerequisite: AMTH 108 or equivalent. (3 units)

This course will center on the practical applications of data science in systems management, employing descriptive, predictive, and prescriptive analyses to recognize patterns and enhance system performance. Topics covered include data mining techniques, decision tree modeling, regression and classification analyses, and the effective management of big data to inform decision-making in industrial and business systems management. Through a combination of hands-on and project-based learning, students will gain proficiency in applying various analytics methods to construct machine learning and predictive models using the Python programming language. (3 units)

Subjects of current interest. May be taken more than once if topics differ. (1–4 units)

Theoretical and practical approaches of human-machine interaction issues for engineers: human factors, human errors, anthropometry, biomechanics, and human performance modeling. Application of these concepts to engineering problems. (3 units)

This course will focus on the strategic application of artificial intelligence in the manufacturing ecosystem, with a specific emphasis on predicting production and process rates, evaluating accuracies, analyzing machinery performance, and strategically planning preventive maintenance to enhance overall system efficiency. Through a comprehensive system analysis, students will acquire valuable insights into the pragmatic implementation of artificial intelligence. The curriculum, enriched by hands-on and project-based learning, will empower students with the proficiency to skillfully apply artificial intelligence modeling techniques using Python programming language for modeling and analyzing industrial and manufacturing systems. (3 units)

Practical experience in a planned program designed to give students practical work experience related to their academic field of study and career objectives. Satisfactory completion of the work assignment includes preparation of a summary report on co-op activities. P/NP grading. May not be taken for graduate credit. (2 units)

Credit given for a technical report on a specific activity such as a design or research project, etc., after completing the co-op assignment. Approval of department advisor required. Letter grades based on content and quality of report. May be taken twice. May not be taken for graduate credit. Prerequisite: COEN 188. (2 units)

Junior preparation for senior project. An introduction to project requirements, team management, and project management. Consideration of career documentation and networking. Tentative project selection. (1 unit)

Specification and initial investigation of an engineering project, selected with the mutual agreement of the student and the project advisor. The design process begins, including problem formulation, research, and preliminary design and analysis. Initial draft of the project report with oral presentation. (2 units)

Continued design and construction of the project, system, or device. The design process continues, including design analysis, testing, and iteration. Second draft of the project report with oral presentation. (2 units)

Completion of design and construction of the project, system or device. Design process concludes with formal communication of project details and specifications. Final project report and formal presentation of results. (1 units)

Investigation of an approved engineering problem and preparation of a suitable project report. Conferences with faculty advisor are required. Prerequisite: Instructor permission required. (1–6 units)

[1]