Undergraduate students are supported with a variety of computing services. Students receive an SCU Username and password that provides access to multiple applications and resources via MySCU. Students also have access to high-speed wired and wireless networks for campus and Internet resources. Students may use the network to access their Gmail and Google Workspace account, Camino learning management system, SmartPrint, Zoom web conferencing, Portfolium, Qualtrics, and Workday.

SCU email is used by the University to send official notifications to undergraduate students, and is also used as a frequent communication tool between and among faculty and students. Students are therefore urged to use their SCU email address as their primary email. Students who opt to utilize other email services are advised to check their SCU email frequently to avoid missing important communications.

The University provides over 140 PC and Mac workstations in the Learning Commons with a variety of software packages to support both general computing needs and multimedia production.

Free guest wireless access is also available for students’ visiting friends and family.

All students have access to administrative information and services at all times through Workday.  Students use Workday to enroll in classes, review financial accounts, maintain personal information like addresses and phone numbers, and more.

Student employees use Workday to fill out their timesheets, view their paychecks and more.

The Information Security Office advocates for the protection of the University’s information assets, and works with campus groups to ensure that students, faculty, and staff have access to all of the information resources they need. This office educates the SCU community on cybersecurity issues, identifies security risks to University networks and data, and works to protect the University against malware, virus outbreaks, and other cyberattacks with modern defense capabilities.

Located on the first floor of the Harrington Learning Commons, Media Services offers a broad range of audio, digital video, web, graphics, and multimedia equipment, resources, and services. Students have access to equipment and services for class-related projects and co-curricular use. Media Services supports technology in classrooms, conference rooms, and campus events spaces; Zoom web conferencing and Panopto video recording/hosting; campus digital signage; and poster printing for academic needs. A Cable TV system in the residence halls is provided by Xfinity On Campus.

Located on the first floor of the Harrington Learning Commons, the Instructional Technology team supports a broad range of resources and services, including the Camino Learning Management System (SCU’s branded version of Canvas); technology tools such as VoiceThread, Hypothesis, and Adobe Creative Cloud; multimedia and multimodal student projects; and the Digital Media Lab on the third floor of the Learning Commons.

Located on the first floor of the Harrington Learning Commons, staff are ready to help you with your computing and network needs. During the academic quarter, the Technology Help Desk is typically open​ seven days a week.  Specific hours and contact information, as well as summer and intersession hours, can be found on the SCU Technology website.

Technology Training delivers software training and support to SCU students. Services include classes, office hours, LinkedIn Learning accounts, and web tutorials that are tailored to help users learn software applications used in teaching, learning, and scholarship. More information about the services offered through Technology Training can be found on the Technology Training website.