Director: Susan Popko

The International Studies Minor enables students to study global issues or problems, or focus on a geographic area—Africa, Europe or Latin America - through an interdisciplinary lens. The International Studies Minor provides a framework for adding a global dimension to a major, or provides preparation for a career working with diverse, intercultural teams.  The minor consists of: four Foundation Courses; three Emphasis Courses; plus a Capstone. Students have the opportunity to customize their interests through either the Global Thematic Emphasis, or Area Studies Emphasis.

For the minor in international studies, students must complete:

Foundation courses

Choose two social science courses below, one of which must be from courses indicated with an "*", and two upper-division modern language courses in a language related to the chosen Global Thematic or Area Studies emphasis, or the equivalent, as demonstrated through placement examination through the Modern Languages Department (MODL)

Two social science courses below, one of which must be from courses indicated with an "*":

The Global Thematic Emphasis (GTE)

Choose three courses, at least two of which must be upper division, and no more than one course which may be in the student's academic major.  The (GTE) offers students the opportunity to focus on an international issue or problem that transcends a single nation or geographic area. In the GTE, students may choose a topic such as:

Examples of GTE courses, in addition to Foundation courses above:

OR

The Area Studies Emphasis (ASE)

Choose three courses, at least two of which must be upper division and no more than one of which may be in the student's academic major. The ASE allows students to focus on a selected geographic area; Africa, Europe, or Latin America. The ASE offers an interdisciplinary introduction to the cultures, languages, politics, and global challenges facing the region. The Area Studies emphasis with a focus on Africa also includes study of the African diaspora and related issues of slavery, colonialism, and globalization. Courses for area studies in

ANDCapstone Course

A minimum of 20 contact hours in a class, academic internship, or community-based learning experience abroad. The course must include academic oversight and assessment. This requirement may be fulfilled by a minimum of one quarter study abroad related to the chosen Area Studies or Global Thematic emphasis. Students should communicate with the Associate Provost for International Programs to request approval for alternative capstone courses.