Santa Clara University supports a broad intercollegiate athletics program and is a Division I member of the National Collegiate Athletic Association (NCAA) and a founding member of the West Coast Conference (WCC).  With 20 intercollegiate sports, Santa Clara fields men’s teams in baseball, basketball, cross country, track and field, golf, rowing, soccer, tennis, and water polo. The women compete in basketball, beach volleyball, cross country, track and field, golf, rowing, soccer, softball, tennis, volleyball, and water polo.

Santa Clara women’s soccer team is perennially among the nation’s elite.  On the heels of winning the 2020 National Championship and following up as the 2021 National Championship Semifinalist, the Broncos repeated as WCC Champions in 2022, their third-straight conference championship title and 13th overall. In the 2023 season, the Broncos qualified for the NCAA Tournament for the 33rd time in program history. Under the direction of head coach Jerry Smith, women’s soccer has appeared in 33 NCAA Tournaments, 12 College Cups, and won two National Championships (2001, 2020), becoming just the seventh program with two or more crowns. The Broncos’ 33 NCAA Tournament appearances are the third-most all-time in NCAA Division I, and their 12 trips to the College Cup is tied for the second-most all-time behind only North Carolina. Julie (Johnston) Ertz, Brandi Chastain, Aly Wagner, Leslie Osborne and Danielle Slaton are among the many former Santa Clara University players who have gone on to win medals at the Olympics and/or World Cup.

Men’s basketball has also achieved national success, having been to 11 NCAA Tournaments, including the 1952 Final Four, and seven other postseason appearances in the National Invitation Tournament (NIT). Led by head coach Herb Sendek, the fourth   most winning coach in program history, and one of just three active men’s basketball coaches in the WCC with 500 career victories, Santa Clara posted their third-straight 20-win season in 2023-24. It is just the third time in program history in which they have posted 20 wins in three-consecutive seasons. Additionally, the Broncos have posted 20 or more wins in four of the last five seasons, which includes the shortened 2020-21 campaign. In 2022, the Broncos had one of their best seasons of recent history with a third-place finish in the WCC and a second-consecutive postseason appearance in the National Invitation Tournament (NIT). The Broncos posted 23 regular-season victories, their most since 1968-69. Sophomore guard Brandin Podziemski was named WCC Co-Player of the Year as well as Newcomer of the Year, and went on to be selected by the Golden State Warriors with 19th overall selection in 2023 NBA Draft, giving the Broncos back-to-back first round selections. Jalen Williams was selected 12th overall in the 2022 draft by the Oklahoma City Thunder to become the Broncos’ first NBA draft pick since 1996, when Steve Nash was also selected in the first round. With Williams and Podziemski both selected inside the top 20 of their respective drafts, Santa Clara was one of just five programs (and the only one from the WCC) with multiple players selected in the top-20 of the 2022 and 2023 drafts. Santa Clara went to three NCAA tournaments during Nash’s four years on the Mission campus, including an upset of second-seeded Arizona in 1993. Nash would go on to become a two-time NBA MVP and is among the most decorated players in NBA history. Other former players include NBA champion Kurt Rambis and fourth-overall NBA draft pick, Ken Sears.

Men’s soccer was co-champions of the WCC in 2023, which was their 14th conference title in program history. In total, they have been to 21 NCAA Tournaments, five College Cups and took home a national title in 1989 when current head coach, Cameron Rast, was a star on the team.

Volleyball also competes among the nation’s best having been to the NCAA Tournament 16 times, including 13 in the last 23 seasons with the 2005 squad making it to the Final Four.

The women’s basketball program has made 13 postseason appearances, including in 2023-24 with a trip to the Women’s Basketball Invitation Tournament (WBIT). The Broncos won their first game of the tournament, giving them their first postseason victory since 1992. The current Head Coach, Bill Carr led the 2020-21 squad to the semifinals of the WCC Tournament for the first time since 2016 when the team qualified for the National Invitation Tournament (WNIT). Carr has more than 250 career wins as a college head coach and collected a pair of league coach of the year honors.

Not to be outdone, Bronco baseball was also crowned WCC Champions in 2023, winning the conference tournament and advancing to the NCAA Tournament for the first time since 1997. Pitcher Skylar Hales went on to be a fourth round pick in the 2023 MLB Draft by the Texas Rangers. In total, Santa Clara has been to 12 NCAA tournaments, including a trip to the 1962 College World Series title game. The team featured eight future major league players, including three who went straight to the major leagues. Overall, there have been 171 Broncos selected in the MLB draft. One of the most famous Santa Clara baseball players, Randy Winn, started as Nash’s backup as point guard on the basketball team before concentrating on the diamond. Winn played in 13 MLB seasons, including five for the San Francisco Giants.

Men’s track and field had its first student athlete in program history to reach the national championship, when Zach Litoff ran in the 3,000m steeplechase at the 2021 NCAA meet.

Santa Clara Athletics also supports the Ruff Riders, the official student fan club, and spirit groups, which include the dance team, pep band, and Bucky the Bronco.

The Broncos are fortunate to play in some of the best facilities on the West Coast: