Professors Emeriti: David F. Caldwell, James Hall, James L. Koch

Professors: Gregory A. Baker (Naumes Family Professor), Tammy L. Madsen (Keck Foundation Chair), Barry Z. Posner (Michael Accolti, S.J., Professor of Leadership and Department Chair), Michael A. Santoro, Manuel G. Velasquez (Charles J. Dirksen Professor of Business Ethics), Jennifer L. Woolley

Associate Professor: Jo-Ellen Pozner

Assistant Professors:  Andy El-Zayaty, Hooria Jazaieri, Ewan Kingston, Shuqi Li, Shaohua Lu, Andrew McBride, Kelly Patterson, Esther Sackett, Vyas Sreenivas, Zhe (Adele) Xing

Senior Lecturer: Nydia MacGregor, Sandy (Kristin) Piderit

Lecturers: Deirdre Frontczak, Francine Gordon, Xiaoying (Fiona) Ji, Long Le

Adjunct Lecturers: Jack Caffey,  Vahideh Abaeian, Phyllis Brock, Sylvia Flatt, Ihsen Ketata, Christina Johnson, Nik Tehrani

Dean’s Executive Professor of Practice:  Tim Harris, Anita Lynch, Sarah Cabral

The Department of Management and Entrepreneurship curriculum emphasizes rigorous analysis and managerial application. Courses are offered in organizational behavior, human resource management, team dynamics, leadership, sustainability, and negotiations. Additional courses in strategic management, business ethics, entrepreneurship, new venture creation, and international management provide an overall leadership perspective.

As a management major, you will be able to analyze complex business problems within the environment within which an organization operates and apply appropriate strategies to solve these problems. You will also develop sound ethical reasoning, interpersonal competencies, and leadership skills. You will also learn and use effective communication, teamwork, and group dynamics skills. These proficiencies will serve you well, regardless of the for-profit or for-purpose organizations you work with. Majors often enrich their academic experience by selecting a minor in entrepreneurship or international business, as well as directed studies practicums and internships.

In addition to fulfilling undergraduate Core Curriculum and Leavey School of Business requirements for the bachelor of science in commerce degree, students majoring in management must complete the following departmental requirements:

A normative inquiry into the ethical issues that arise in business and how they should be managed. Attention is given to current moral issues in business and ethical theories or frameworks, their implications for these issues, and to the managerial implications. Topics may include truth in advertising, corporate social responsibility, stakeholder theory, sustainability, affirmative action, government regulation of business, quality of work-life, environmental and resource issues, and ethical codes of conduct. Students who take PHIL 26 may not take this course for credit. (4 units)

Honors section. A normative inquiry into the ethical issues that arise in business and how they should be managed. Attention is given to current moral issues in business, ethical theories or ethical frameworks, and their implications for these issues and leadership implications. Topics may include truth in advertising, corporate social responsibility, stakeholder theory, sustainability, affirmative action, government regulation of business, quality of work-life, environmental and resource issues, and ethical codes of conduct. Students who take PHIL 26 may not take this course for credit. Prerequisite: Enrollment is restricted to University Honors or Leavey Scholars program students. (4 units)

This course examines the foundational knowledge required of individuals who seek to effectively manage organizations that meet the triple bottom line: social, economic, and environmental sustainability. Students will learn the concepts critical for understanding sustainability from biological, economic, and social perspectives. Students will learn ho if w to justify the pursuit of sustainable business practices, illustrate the role of businesses in building a just and equitable future, and demonstrate how systems thinking helps explain our world's interdependent nature. (2 units)

The main focus of this course is to share the core skills necessary for professionals who work to advance sustainability in organizations and communities successfully. Students will learn to assess an organization’s sustainability practices and make appropriate strategy recommendations. Students will be able to illustrate the role of businesses in building a just and equitable future and articulate how change agents can inspire action at multiple levels to build a more sustainable world. (2 units)

This course allows students to apply the theoretical skills they have learned in previous classes to a real-world organization or “client”, and gain valuable business skills they can use in future internships or full-time roles.  Students will learn the foundational principles of sustainable business and explore leadership challenges to advance social and environmental objectives within an actual business or organization. The course counts toward credit in the Design Thinking, Paradigm Shift, and Sustainability pathways.  (4 units)

This one-unit seminar introduces the foundational professional development skills necessary to plan and implement internship and career search strategies. By the end of the seminar, students will create a career action plan for launching an internship search and building their lifelong network. Prerequisite: Must be a Leavey School of Business major, have sophomore standing, or permission by instructor to enroll.  (1 unit)

An introduction to the nature, forms, and objectives of the contemporary business firm and its relationship to the modern business environment. Text learning is augmented by classroom discussion, connecting learning points to current events and a comprehensive business simulation. (4 units)

Founded on the understanding that all leadership begins with self-knowledge, this course is intended to orient students to the practice of leadership. In this course, leadership will be presented not as a position but rather a mindset, a way of doing things based on who you are and what you want to achieve. Students will be provided with an introduction to specific practices of effective leadership through directed readings and reflective writing assignments. (2 units)

Examining the basic conceptual vocabulary and theories regarding today's economic, political, and social influences on international business. Topics may include international trade, financial systems, political institutions, cultural factors, corporate structure, and market entry. Students taking this class may not receive credit for MGMT 80L taken in the Santa Clara London Program or any equivalent course in a study abroad program. Prerequisites: BUSN 70 or 170, and ECON 3. (4 units)

This course introduces students to microfinance's theories, practices, and issues — a social enterprise movement that serves entrepreneurs who lack access to traditional banking services. Grounded and enhanced by systems thinking and design thinking, students will understand structural constraints, trade-offs, and paradoxes in problem-solving the current challenges facing microfinance operations. In engaging with stakeholders in microfinance, students will employ global business and management skills to empower the world’s unbanked entrepreneurs. Prerequisite: MGMT 80 and ACTG 11. This course also satisfies the ELSJ requirement. (5 units)

Introduction to organization theory and practice with an emphasis on organizational behavior, inclusive of the contexts of the individual, the group, and the organization as a whole. Prerequisite: Students must have completed 60 units. (5 units)

Introduction to organization theory and practice with an emphasis on organizational behavior, inclusive of the contexts of the individual, the group, and the organization as a whole. Prerequisites: Open only to students in the Leavey Scholars Program. Students must have completed 60 units. (5 units)

Focuses on the processes by which managers position their businesses or assets to maximize long-term value creation and capture in the face of uncertainty, rapid change, and competition. Covers various frameworks for analyzing an industry’s structure and competitive position and developing a coherent and viable firm strategy. Requires students to integrate and extend their knowledge and skills developed throughout their coursework (e.g., marketing, finance, economics, organizational behavior, ethics, information systems, statistical analysis, operations management, accounting, etc.) into a “total” business perspective. Prerequisites: ECON 41 and 42 or OMIS 41; FNCE 121 or 121S; MGMT 80, 160, or 160S; MKTG 181 or 181S; and senior standing. (5 units)

Focuses on the processes by which managers position their businesses or assets to maximize long-term value creation and capture in the face of uncertainty, rapid change, and competition. The course covers various frameworks for analyzing an industry’s structure and competitive position and developing a coherent and viable firm strategy. Requires students to integrate and extend their knowledge and skills developed throughout their coursework (e.g., marketing, finance, economics, organizational behavior, ethics, information systems, statistical analysis, operations management, accounting, etc.) into a “total” business perspective. Enrollment in the Leavey Scholars Program is restricted to students. Prerequisites: ECON 41 and 42 or OMIS 41; FNCE 121 or 121S; MGMT 80, 160, or 160S; MKTG 181 or 181S; senior standing; and a minimum 3.5 cumulative GPA. (5 units)

The course looks at the practice of business innovation and entrepreneurship, emphasizing how entrepreneurs identify opportunities, evaluate resources, build organizations, and understand the phenomena of entrepreneurship.  MGMT 164 is an introductory course intended to provide a foundation regarding the role of entrepreneurship, discussing ideas about entrepreneurship and entrepreneurs in society and the economy. Prerequisites: ACTG 11 and MKTG 181. (5 units)

This course integrates many of entrepreneurial concepts, tools, and practices.  This course systematically and practically studies business creation and evaluation for new ventures and entrepreneurial projects.  Students will learn to assess and shape venture ideas, convert these ideas into viable businesses, and present these businesses to external stakeholders.  Topics include new venture execution plans, alternatives, and trade-offs in financing, feasibility, resource acquisition, venture growth, and harvesting.  The course includes a discussion of cases, lectures, and presentations by guest lecturers who have played a role in starting new enterprises.  The course builds on foundation concepts from the Introductory Entrepreneurship course. It is designed for students seriously considering launching a new venture in various contexts and for students planning to work in an early-stage venture. Prerequisite: MGMT 164. (5 units)

A comprehensive review of the role and functions of human resource management departments in business organizations, with particular emphasis on selection and placement, training and development, and compensation systems. Prerequisite: MGMT 160 or 160S, or permission of instructor. (5 units)

This course provides insight into the thought processes of Venture Capitalists. It will cover all aspects of deal flow, including sourcing opportunities, performing due diligence, determining valuation, and constructing term sheets. While inspired as a way to prepare students for the Venture Capital Investment Competition (held in the Winter quarter), it offers an introduction to the VC world for students interested in becoming investors and those hoping to obtain VC funds as entrepreneurs. (5 units)

Cities and local governments face many challenges as cities grow and expand. This can be both a hub for innovation and a catalyst for economic growth if entrepreneurs can understand how to build and sell solutions to these problems to governments. This course will help students to attain a fuller understanding of conducting business within various types of governments. Student(s) will interview city leaders, attend meetings, and conduct research to identify traits of successful business leaders who engage in business with various governments. This class will uncover how city officials prioritize and evaluate projects and gauge the economic effects of those decisions. This course looks at innovation and social entrepreneurship within the public sector. In addition, students can learn how to do business as an entrepreneur with a local government and know what resources are available to entrepreneurs through those local governments. Students will learn how to become a successful entrepreneur selling a product or idea to a local government and how to be change agents of innovation within public sector organizations. Prerequisite: MGMT 160 or 160S and MGMT 164. (5 units).

The impact of public policy on business and how businesses adapt to and influence public policies. Includes ideology, corporate social responsibility, government regulations, and business political activity. Lectures/discussions; case analyses. (5 units)

Today’s business managers are challenged to set strategies, develop organizations, lead people, and control performance in a local context. They also need to understand and lead within a complex global context.  This course is designed to help students: 1) understand multinational management; 2) recognize the challenges and opportunities presented by global markets; 3) implement a global strategy using organizational design, human resources management, and leadership development. Prerequisite: MGMT 80. MGMT 160 or 160S is recommended. (5 units)

Interpersonal and small-group communication. Negotiating behavior. Oral and written communication. Integrates theory and skill-building through reading, case analysis, and practice. Prerequisite: MGMT 160 or 160S, or permission of instructor. (5 units)

This course focuses on emerging enterprise models at the interface of the public, private, and nonprofit sectors. It examines theories of change and the dynamics of social innovation. It develops conceptual and practical tools for creating high-performance organizations capable of addressing seemingly intractable problems financially sustainably. Analysis of exemplary social business ventures will illustrate how the discipline of business planning can contribute to the development of social ventures that are economically viable at scale. Students will apply this knowledge to the writing and analysis of a case on—and/or service learning for—an actual social business. Prerequisite: Students must have completed 87.5 units or have permission from the instructor. (5 units)

Exploration of relationships among food production, resource use, and the environment. Topics include food innovation, biotechnology, the green revolution, resource depletion, environmental degradation, and food safety. Also listed as ECON 101. (5 units)

A conceptual framework for understanding leadership and opportunities for developing leadership skills. This interactive course requires personal reflection on leadership experiences. Prerequisite: Students must have completed 87.5 units or have permission from the instructor. (5 units)

We spend a large portion of our waking lives at work. It follows that what goes on in the workplace can significantly impact our ability to flourish – to be in optimal mental and social well-being. Throughout this interactive course, we will explore various Positive Organizational Scholarship topics from the fields of Organizational Behavior and Psychology that contribute to flourishing individuals, relationships, and systems. The first half of the course focuses on promoting individual flourishing, including mindsets, values, identity, authenticity, and meaning at work. The second half of the course will focus on promoting flourishing interpersonal relationships and systems, including topics such as creating high-quality connections, psychological safety in teams, positive interpersonal emotions, networks, culture, and change. Prerequisite: MGMT 160 or 160S. (5 units)

In this course, you will study the existing food system, issues of food access, justice, sovereignty, and opportunities to use technology and innovation to create a more just and sustainable food system. We will examine how food policy and lobbying affect food production and consumption and the role of food policy in food insecurity, health risks tied to food, and climate change. The first third of the class focuses on agricultural production, food policy, and issues of access and affordability. The second third analyzes the role of food production in climate change, supply chains, and opportunities for creating more sustainable, traceable, and transparent supply chains. In the final third of the course, we will discuss disruptive innovation opportunities in the agricultural and food technology fields as agents of change. (5 units)

This course introduces students to the skills, practices, and processes for understanding and managing innovation and entrepreneurship activities that span cultures worldwide. These cultural challenges include the development of an entrepreneurial mindset and adopting new organizational forms (e.g., open innovation, crowdsourcing). Students must have completed 60 units. (5 units)

More and more companies are adopting human rights policies, conducting human rights due diligence, reporting on their human rights performance, and employing teams of human rights experts. Through interactive exercises, debates, case studies, and role-play, this course will provide you with the knowledge, skills and tools to identify and address a company’s human rights risks and leverage the power of business to advance human rights worldwide. (5 units)

A comprehensive examination of corporate risk, including history, current practices, and the impact of risk appetites on culture (and vice versa). Coverage of risk classification, organizational risk structures, and enterprise risk management.  Students will identify, prioritize, mitigate, and report risks via a hypothetical company with an analysis of actual risks impacting our global corporate landscape. Students will gain familiarity with heat maps and other planning tools and engage in drafting business continuity and disaster recovery plans. Overview of professional risk roles, responsibilities, and skills required to obtain these compelling jobs. Focus on understanding risk management roles and honing relevant skills. Prerequisite: MGMT 80, MGMT 6 and ECON 3 (5 units)

We negotiate every day, both at work and in our personal lives. The overall goal of this course is to create a learning community where we can all improve our understanding of both the art and the science of negotiation. By learning about the research-based theories of negotiation, students will gain analytic skills in understanding negotiation principles. In preparing for the role plays assigned, students will practice selecting appropriate negotiation strategies for different contexts. By practicing negotiation in several different behavioral simulations and reflecting critically on simulation outcomes, students will gain practical skills in influencing others to secure productive agreements through negotiation. Prerequisite: MGMT 160 or 160S may be taken concurrently with instructor permission. (5 units)

The foundation of Conscientious Capitalism is: “To lead others, I will first learn to lead myself.” The course inspires and teaches students the role of purpose, virtue, intentionality, tenacity, and accountability in their leadership journey. The course uses three distinct but related activities to achieve this goal. Nationally renowned business, military, and civic leaders share the experiences and challenges that shaped them, their careers, and major decisions. The goal of having iconic leaders share with honesty and vulnerability is to inspire students to do the same in the course and their lives. Harvard Business School cases allow students to learn from the most critical business and policy decisions of our times. Putting students in the role of decision-maker challenges them to understand the complexity of decision-making and leadership and begins to train them for their careers post-SCU. Leadership Development Teams (LDTs) are small, mentored groups. The goal is for students to explore and share their authentic selves and develop the courage to live authentically in their careers and lives. Note: We seek evidence of a student’s ambition to make an impact and the hunger and maturity to pursue the journey of self-awareness, authenticity, and courageous action. Enrollment is based on the instructor's permission. (5 units)

Work closely with the department to help students in core management classes to understand course material, think more deeply about the material, and feel less anxious about testing situations. Prerequisites: Declared management major and permission of instructor and chair required before enrollment. (1 or 2 units)

Offered occasionally to introduce new topics not covered by existing electives. Topics generally reflect the research interests of the faculty teaching the course. Prerequisites: MGMT 160 or 160S and MGMT 174, and the instructor and chair must approve a written proposal one week before registration. (5 units)

Opportunity for students to apply managerial knowledge and skills as well as leadership skills through their internship in local organizations. Prerequisites: MGMT 160 or 160S and MGMT 174 (can be taken concurrently) and two courses from the following list: MGMT 162, 166, 169, 170, 171, 172, 173, 175, 176, 177, 178, 180, 181. Students must have completed 60 units and have the approval of the undergraduate committee one week before registration. MGMT 198 is for the Management Major. Students cannot take both MGMT 198 and MGMT 198E. (1–5 units)

This course brings together your academic studies with real-world start-up experience. As such, the class has two segments: An on-site internship and an academic segment. The internship must be at least 10 hours per week (80 hours per quarter, starting by the first week of class). During the internship, you will help a Silicon Valley entrepreneurial organization (start-up) develop and build a new venture. Here, you will observe a new venture during its formative years. The academic component entails applying your business studies to a new firm setting. You will examine and analyze your internship experiences with your academic learning. The ultimate product of this class is an in-depth case study of the firm and its founders. Prerequisites: MGMT 164 and must have a declared entrepreneurship minor. MGMT 165 may be taken concurrently. Students cannot take both MGMT 198 and MGMT 198E. (5 units)

Independent projects undertaken by upper-division students with a faculty sponsor. Prerequisites: MGMT 160 or 160S, MGMT 174, and a written proposal must be approved by the instructor and chair one week before registration. (1-5 units)