Professors Emeriti: Jerry M. Burger, Lucia Albino Gilbert, Tracey L. Kahan, Marvin L. Schroth, Eleanor W. Willemsen

Professors: Matthew C. Bell, Thomas G. Plante (Augustin Cardinal Bea, S.J., University Professor), Patricia M. Simone , Kieran T. Sullivan, Tim Urdan

Associate Professors: Kathryn Bruchmann, Birgit Koopmann-Holm, Kirsten Read

Assistant Professors: Lang Chen, Giselle Laiduc, Michelle Rivers

Senior Lecturer: Lisa Whitfield (Department Chair)

Lecturer: Jui Bhagwat

The Department of Psychology offers a degree program leading to the bachelor of science in psychology. Psychology is the study of behavior, emotion, and thought using the scientific method. At the undergraduate level, the study of psychology is part of a liberal arts education. A major in psychology lays the groundwork for various careers and advanced studies, including the pursuit of graduate degrees needed for the professional practice of psychology.

In addition to fulfilling undergraduate Core Curriculum requirements for the bachelor of science degree, students majoring in psychology must complete the following departmental requirements:

Honors in Psychology

Psychology majors may be selected for graduation with Honors in Psychology provided they have a grade point average of 3.3 or higher in their psychology courses, complete PSYC 99 and a senior project in a manner approved by the faculty honors committee. Honors students are expected to participate in various department-sponsored events.

The scientific study of behavior. Topics include the biological basis of behavior, sensation and perception, learning, memory, language, problem solving, intelligence, sleep and dreaming, consciousness, and examines research methods and critical analysis of research. Prerequisites: None. (4 units)

The honors version of PSYC 1. Restricted to students in the University Honors Program and students entering with AP Psychology credit. (4 units)

The scientific study of behavior. Topics include human development, personality, abnormal psychology, clinical intervention, social psychology, psychological assessment, motivation and emotion, cross-cultural psychology, and examines research methods and critical analysis of research. Prerequisites: None. (4 units)

Personal experience, the scientific method, journalistic techniques, anthropological observation methods, intuition, and faith (religious, paranormal) are just a few of the ways of knowing that people use. This course explores each of these ways of knowing with the goal of answering the following questions: What are the strengths of each way of knowing? What are the limitations? Which method of inquiry is best for answering different types of questions? Prerequisites: None. (4 units)

An introduction to statistical and research methods used in psychological research. This is the first course in a required three-course statistics and research methods sequence for the psychology major. Prerequisites: Declared psychology major, PSYC 1 or 2. (4 units)

A further examination of the statistical and research methods used in psychological research. This is the second course in a required three-course statistics and research methods sequence for the psychology major. Prerequisites: PSYC 1, 2, and PSYC 51. (4 units)

This is the third course in a required three-course statistics and research methods sequence for the psychology major. In this course, more advanced statistics and research methods are discussed and then applied to student research projects developed and presented at the end of the course. Psychology majors must complete Psyc 53 - to fulfill lower division major requirements. Prerequisite: PSYC 52 and MATH 8. (4 units)

A basic introduction to brain structure and function. The course has standard lecture hours but integrates hands-on laboratory experiential exercises during the class sessions. Prerequisite: None. (4 units)

Skill development (including practice with data management software, public speaking, writing, and/or ethics) and career development (e.g., preparing applications for graduate programs and/or jobs after college). Students must be accepted into the psychology honors program to enroll in this course. (2 units)

This course will focus on the development of writing, reading, critical thinking, and literature search skills within traditional formats for communicating scholarship in psychology. Specifically, students will practice using APA style writing for experimental reports and literature reviews. Additionally, this course will include units on graduate school preparation including writing effective cover letters and personal statements. Prerequisites: ENGL 1 and 2 and all lower-division psychology requirements. (5 units)

Seminar exploring theories and research in motivation and emotion. Students will read, discuss, and critically analyze current empirical research and review articles in these areas. Topics emphasized will include cultural and individual variation in motivation and emotion, development of motivation and emotion, and the social, cognitive, and biological bases of motivation and emotion. Prerequisites: Senior standing and all lower-division psychology requirements. (5 units)

Scientific study of the various motivational and emotional processes of people and higher animals. Biological drives, psychological survival needs, altered states of consciousness, social motives, and theories of emotion. Prerequisites: All lower-division psychology requirements.. (5 units)

The role of ethical behavior and decision making in the field of psychology and related behavioral, medical, and social sciences. Topics include approaches to moral issues and related to competence; integrity; professional, scientific, and social responsibility; respect for others’ rights and dignity; and concern for others’ welfare. Prerequisite: PSYC 1 or 2. (5 units)

The study of psychology and human behavior in understanding the etiology, nature, development, and treatment of mental disorders. Topics include models of psychopathology, research, diagnosis, assessment, and treatment of emotional and behavioral disorders, such as affective disorders, personality disorders, sexual disorders, substance abuse disorders, and childhood disorders. Prerequisite: PSYC 1 or 2. (5 units)

Advanced topics in psychopathology involve the discipline and principles of psychopathology in understanding the etiology, nature, development, and treatment of behavior and emotional problems and issues. Class topics include the history of psychiatric illness, theoretical models, assessment and intervention approaches, specialization, consultation, ethics, and current trends in the field. The course is designed for senior psychology majors interested in a career in clinical or counseling psychology or related fields. Prerequisites: Senior standing, all lower-division psychology requirements, and PSYC 115. (5 units)

Health psychology involves the discipline and principles of psychology and human behavior in understanding how the mind and body interact in health and disease. Topics include health promotion and primary prevention of illness, health enhancing and health damaging behaviors, psychosomatic illness, stress and coping, pain management, and a variety of specific behavior-related medical illnesses (e.g., heart disease, eating disorders, cancer, and AIDS). Prerequisite: PSYC 1 or 2.(5 units)

Advanced topics in health psychology that involve the discipline and principles of health psychology in understanding the etiology, nature, development, and treatment of health damaging and health enhancing topics.  Class topics include theoretical models, assessment and intervention approaches, ethics, and current trends in the field.  The course is designed for senior psychology majors interested in a career in health psychology or related fields.  Senior standing, all lower-division psychology requirements, and Psyc 117 or 117EL.  (5 units)

A theoretical and empirical investigation of human perceptual processes, with an emphasis on both theories and methods. Topics include sensory and perceptual processes of all sensory modalities, with more focus on the vision. We will also explore multisensory integration, the relationship between perception and high-level cognition (memory, language, social cognition, etc.,), applications to real-life problems. Also, we will develop methodological skills and make connections to your knowledge and skills learned from research methods. Prerequisites: all lower-division psychology requirements, or permission of instructor. Psychology Majors: Psyc 53; Neuroscience Majors: Neur 1 and Neur 10. (5 Units)

A scientific investigation of the principles of learning focused on both experimental and theoretical aspects of the experimental analysis of behavior. Topics include basic behavioral processes (e.g., habituation), classical conditioning, and operant conditioning. Prerequisites: All lower-division psychology requirements. (5 units)

A theoretical, empirical, and experiential investigation of human information processing. Topics include the history of cognitive psychology and the following research areas: pattern perception, attention, working memory, long-term memory, memory distortions, imagery, language processes, problem solving and decision-making. Prerequisites: All lower-division psychology requirements. (5 units)

Seminar examines contemporary topics in learning theory and research. This course may emphasize theory and/or application. Original research and current trends will be highlighted. Prerequisites: Senior standing and all lower-division psychology requirements. Recommended but not required: PSYC 130 or 140. (5 units)

Seminar explores contemporary theories and research in cognitive psychology and cognitive neuroscience. Class topics include consciousness, attention, memory, metacognition, and the relationship between imagery and perception. Prerequisites: Senior standing and all lower-division psychology requirements. . Recommended, but not required: PSYC 120, 131, or 166. (5 units)

The role of educational psychology is to understand and improve educational practice through the study of learning and teaching. Students enrolled in this course will be exposed to a variety of topics that relate to the study of learning and teaching. Such topics include cognitive development and language; personal, moral, and social development; learner differences and learner needs; culture and community; behavioral views of learning; motivation in learning and teaching; creating learning environments and evaluation, measurement, and success. Students in this course will be asked to apply what we read about and discuss in class to solve real-world problems related to education. Prerequisites: Junior or Senior standing. (5 units)

This course examines human language as it is studied from a psychological perspective. Psycholinguistics focuses on understanding how spoken and written language can be dissected into smaller units of sound, meaning, and structure; how language skill develops; how language is used in the social world; and what the causes and consequences are when language breaks down. This course will cover major perspectives and controversies in the field, a variety of experimental techniques that are used to test theories and investigate language use, and how psycholinguistic research can be applied to our everyday experience. Prerequisite: PSYC 1 or 2. (5 units)

A theoretical, empirical, and experiential exploration of human memory. Emphasizes theory and research, including recent developments in cognitive neuroscience. Topics include historical and contemporary approaches to the scientific study of memory, attention and memory, working memory, long term memory, prospective memory, autobiographical memory, eyewitness memory, age-related changes in memory, what happens when memory fails, and strategies for improving memory. Prerequisites: For Psychology Majors--PSYC 1, 2, 51, 52, and 53. For Neuroscience majors-- NEUR 10. (5 units)

A scientific investigation of the principles of learning using experimental work focused on the application of behavior analysis. Prerequisites: Psyc 1 or 2 and declared Psychology or Public Health major. (5 units)

Seminar examines contemporary topics in the cross-cultural study of emotion. Topics include the structure and categorization of affect and emotion across cultures (e.g., are there culture-specific emotions?), cultural similarities and differences in views of emotions and in different aspects of emotions (e.g., subjective experience, expressive behavior, and physiology). Prerequisites: Senior standing, all lower-division psychology requirements, and either PSYC 150 or 160, or 162. (5 units)

Principles and issues related to testing and measurement in psychology. Topics include test construction, reliability, validity, and the professional and ethical use of psychological tests and test scores. Prerequisites: All lower-division psychology requirements. (5 units)

This course explores the scientific investigation of how people influence each other. Students will learn social psychological theories about the causes of human behavior, as well as how these theories can be scientifically tested and applied to solve real-world problems. Topics include social cognition, the self, social influence, intergroup processes, and aggression. Prerequisites: PSYC 1, 2, 51, and 52. (5 units)

This seminar examines contemporary topics in social psychology specifically focusing on social psychological interventions. Topics will include "growth mindset" interventions, self-compassion interventions, self-affirmation interventions, and construal level interventions. Students will read, critique, and discuss primary research in this discussion-based class, and they will be responsible for generating their own research proposal. Prerequisites: Senior standing, all lower-division psychology requirements, and PSYC 150. (5 units)

This seminar will explore stigma as a fundamental cause of health inequalities across a broad range of phenomena, including (but not limited to) mental illness, sexual and gender diversity, race/ethnicity, weight, disability, aging, poverty, housing insecurity, and immigration status. In doing so, students will develop an understanding of: (1) how stigma is conceptualized and measured across individual (e.g., internalized stigma), interpersonal (e.g., discrimination), and structural (e.g., structural stigma) levels; (2) evolutionary, psychological, and sociological motivations of stigmatization; (3) biopsychosocial mechanisms through which stigma affects health; and (4) interventions to reduce stigma and health consequences. Throughout the course students will have the opportunity to develop expertise in an individual stigma relevant to their personal, academic, and professional interests. Prerequisites: PSYC 52.  This course is cross listed with PHSC 178.

This course is an introduction to the scientific investigation of intimate relationships. Book chapters and journal articles will be drawn from clinical psychology and social psychology. Topics include research methods for studying intimate relationships; theories of attraction, love, and marriage; how we think about and behave in relationships; and interventions for distressed relationships. Prerequisites: PSYC 1, 2, 51 and 52. (5 units)

Seminar examines contemporary topics in the psychology of intimate relationships. The focus will be on original basic and applied research from social psychology and clinical psychology. Topics will include contemporary dating relationships, the use of technology to initiate and maintain relationships, and predictors of outcomes in long-term intimate relationships such as marriage. Prerequisites: Senior standing; all lower-division psychology requirements; and PSYC 153. (5 units)

An introduction to the broad field of Industrial/Organizational (I/O) psychology, which includes science and practice related to personnel selection and placement, training, and development; organizational development; occupational health and safety; work motivation; and other areas concerned with human behavior in organizational contexts. Prerequisites: PSYC 1 or 2. (5 units)

In this course, we will seek to understand users’ needs and experiences, focusing on the practicalities of conducting impactful UX research. We’ll approach this holistically, covering both quantitative and qualitative approaches to research equally and learn all about defining research questions, selecting research approaches and methods, making and executing research plans, analyses, reporting, and implementing findings. There is an emphasis on hands-on practices that are anchored in psychological knowledge and theory and can be used immediately in real-world settings. Prerequisites: PSYC 53. (5 units)

The study of individual differences and personality processes. Discussion of major theories of personality and emotion. Current challenges and controversies in personality and affective science. Different methods for assessing personality and emotion. Applications of personality and affective science to everyday life. Prerequisites: PSYC 1, 2 and 52. (5 units)

Introduction to the perspective and methodology of cultural psychology, which focuses on the cultural constitution of psychological phenomena. This course alternates between abstract discussions (of culture, evolution, and psychology) and more concrete examples of human cultural variation. This course will help students recognize and challenge their assumptions about "human nature," the "person," and what is "natural, good, and moral." Prerequisites: PSYC 1, 2, 51 and 52. (5 units)

This course will explore the nature and consequences of alcohol and drug addiction from biological, psychological, and public health perspectives. Students will study common drugs of addiction, the underlying causes of addiction, and treatment strategies. Societal impacts and responses to substance abuse and addiction will be examined in depth. Also listed as PHSC 160. (5 units)

Emphasis on the neural correlates of motivation, emotion, learning, and memory. May include topics such as: mechanisms of drug action, neural circuit function and dysfunction, and empirical investigation into neural modulation of behavior. Prerequisites: For Psychology Majors: PSYC 1 and 2 required; 51 and 52 preferred. For Neuroscience majors: PSYC 1, NEUR 1 and 10 required. (5 units)

Study of human brain function from an experimental perspective. Addresses questions such as: What are the brain mechanisms that lie at the basis of perception and memory, of speech and thought, of movement and action? What happens to these processes when individual parts of the brain are destroyed by disease? Prerequisite: For Psychology Majors--PSYC 1, 2, 51, and 52. For Neuroscience majors--PSYC 1, NEUR 1 and 10. (5 units)

Examination of the effects of various drugs on the brain and behavior. Topics include various drugs of abuse including legal drugs (e.g., nicotine, alcohol) and illegal drugs (e.g., cocaine, heroin). Prerequisite: For Psychology Majors--PSYC 1, 2, 51, and 52. For Neuroscience majors--PSYC 1, NEUR 1 and 10. (5 Units)

An integration from various sub-disciplines in psychology with an emphasis on the brain and behavior. Topics may include stress effects on neural development, reward and aversion processing, mental health, memory and/or the effects of drugs on brain and behavior. Prerequisites: Senior standing and all lower-division psychology requirements Recommended but not required: PSYC 165, 166 or 167. (5 units)

The scientific study of the biological processes and aspects that underlie cognition, with a specific focus on the neural connections in the brain which are involved in mental processes. The class will focus on the neurophysiological and neuroscientific evidence for psychological theories of higher mental function, including attention, memory, perception, consciousness and emotion. We will also discuss how the research in cognitive neuroscience relates to various aspects of our daily life, including topics on AI, neuro-ethics, decision-making, morality, culture, and law. Prerequisite: For Psychology Majors--PSYC 1, 2, 51, and 52. Prerequisite: For Neuroscience majors--PSYC 1, NEUR 1 and 10. (5 Units)

How do you know something to be true? We explore that fundamental question by examining different ways of knowing, pursuing a more nuanced and sophisticated understanding. We question how we come to construct and accept existing beliefs in psychology, communication, and the general public by challenging what we believe we know to be true. Drawing on humanities, arts, and sciences we will pursue developing critical thinking with the goal of enhanced decision-making reflecting cura personalis. Cross-listed with COMM 169. Prerequisite: upper-division standing. (5 units)

A focus on development during the second decade of life, from puberty through early adulthood. Topics include physical, intellectual, and social development; identity; sexuality; changing social contexts; and life transitions. Prerequisite: PSYC 1 or 2. (5 units)

In this class, we will explore a few advanced methods to study human behaviors and cognition. Statistical techniques such as Structural Equation Modeling (SEM) and generalized linear models (GLM) will be introduced to analyze complicated cross-sectional and longitudinal datasets, and some state-of-art machine learning methods such as classification, clustering, and neural network models will be explained and introduced. Students will learn some theoretical backgrounds as well as practice examples of these methods with a heavy emphasis on hands-on practices (YES, you need to get your hands dirty!!). In addition, some basic data science skills such as data management and coding in R/RStudio will be practiced. Prereq: Senior standing and all lower-division psychology requirements.(5 units)

Seminar examines contemporary topics in developmental psychology. Original research, current trends, and special focus on ongoing research and applied programs will be highlighted. Focus of seminar can be children and adolescent development or young adult development. Prerequisites: Senior standing; all lower-division psychology requirements; and PSYC 172, 184, 185, or 196. (5 units)

Identity is a prominent construct in several sub-disciplines within psychology, including developmental, social, personality, gender, and cross-cultural. In addition, issues of identity increasingly are recognized as an important factor affecting our behavior and beliefs. Identity politics, ethnic and racial biases, and the #TimesUp movement are but three examples of the central role of identity in current events.  The purpose of this class is to understand the multifaceted nature of identity and how it has been examined in psychology. Prerequisites: All lower-division psychology requirements (5 units)

This course examines research on the psychology of gender. Students will learn the leading theories of gender, as well as how gender can be scientifically studied. This course will discuss real world issues surrounding gender (e.g., stereotypes, sexism, the gender pay gap, objectification, etc.) and their potential solutions.Prerequisite: PSYC 1 or 2. (5 units)

This course will investigate the psychological development of humans from conception through toddlerhood to age three. It will include relevant genetic theory, physical, perceptual, and motor development, neurological and cognitive development, early temperament and social development, and individual differences. We will explore how these areas of growth interact within individuals as they build on their earliest foundations during the most rapidly unfolding period of life. We will unpack the unique research methods used to understand and assess these areas of development. And, students will learn first-hand about the practical applications of understanding how typical developmental progresses. Prerequisites: Psyc 1, 2, 51, and 52. (5 units)

An upper-division survey of child development, including infancy, early childhood, middle childhood, and a brief introduction to adolescent issues. Major developmental theories and methods of studying development are introduced. Principal findings regarding social-emotional, cognitive, and physical development in the different stages of childhood are included, as well as findings about the impact on development of the societal context in which development occurs. Prerequisite: PSYC 1 or 2. (5 units)

The discipline and principles of psychology and human behavior in understanding religion and spirituality. Topics include empirical research and theory on religious and spiritual behavior and transformation from the various religious, spiritual, and historical wisdom traditions. Contemplative practices and spiritual tools from the various religious/spiritual wisdom traditions for psychological and physical health will be highlighted. A spiritual formation project will help students experience a hands-on activity to examine their own spiritual formation and development. This course is inclusive in that no particular religious/spiritual tradition or any tradition affiliation is assumed or required, and also highlights evidence-based empirical approaches. Prerequisites: PSYC 1 or 2, and a RTC 1 class. (5 units)

Students enrolled in this course will participate in training designed to help them serve in a peer leadership role within the psychology department. Attendance at regular meetings and workshops is required and will be facilitated by a Psychology Faculty Advisor. After training, students will be assigned the role of Peer Advisor and will meet with fellow psychology majors to help them with course planning, course selection, and to assist with questions about the major. Prerequisites: Restricted to psychology majors who have completed PSYC 51. (1 unit; may be repeated for credit)

Development in later life. Topics include theories of aging and development; cognition, perceptual, and social changes in aging; mental health issues in the elderly; and abnormal aging, such as Alzheimer’s disease. Prerequisites: Junior standing and PSYC 1 or 2,. (5 units)

Psychology labs vary by topic. Lab assistants will work on projects up to 10 hours per week, as determined by the faculty research supervisor. Students accepted to a lab will register via permission number with their supervisor. (1 unit)

A course where students can learn how they can best apply classroom instruction to their career objectives through academically supported work experience. Internships at Santa Clara University are closely monitored for appropriateness and practical application. Internships should encourage career skills and professional growth. Internships serve to introduce the student to the range of opportunities afforded a degree in the discipline. Students are expected to represent the University in a professional manner and to act responsibly with the client and the assignments. Selected readings. Open to upper-division students with a GPA of 3.0 or higher who have received permission from a faculty sponsor. (1-5 units). Note: If taken for 5 units, students should select 198E when enrolling. Psyc 198E may be used for an upper division psychology elective.

Independent projects undertaken by upper-division students with a faculty sponsor. To receive course credit, the student must submit a formal written proposal and have it approved by the sponsoring faculty member and the department chair. The proposal must be submitted before the end of the previous quarter and must meet University requirements for independent study credit. (1–5 units) Note: If taken for 5 units, students should enroll in 199E to receive credit for an upper division psychology elective, OR enroll in 199A if they would prefer that the units count toward the Advanced Topics requirement for the major instead.