Executive Director: Kirthi Kalyanam Ph.D

The Retail Management Institute (RMI) is a recognized academic partner of the dynamic retail industry with more than a 40-year history. We have a strong reputation for developing strategic leaders with the advanced skills necessary for success in the new technology infused world of retail.

RMI provides a platform for deep collaboration between industry and leading academics into the emerging and evolving concepts impacting retail today. The knowledge generated from this collaboration forms the basis of our curriculum.

The minor in retail studies offered by RMI is an in-depth hands-on experience that prepares students for a diverse set of roles in retailing including e-commerce, buying, merchandising, planning and allocation, digital marketing, and supply chain management. Open to all University undergraduates, students entering the retail studies minor continue to major in their field of interest.

Business and non-business majors get an opportunity to discover an exciting and dynamic industry in which to build their passions. For many business majors, broad business theories develop deeper meaning as they are applied specifically and in an integrative manner to the retail industry. Retailing is at the forefront of trends in digital and mobile marketing and social media. This provides a fertile ground for economics, arts and science, finance, psychology and engineering students to leverage their unique background.

Comprised of a set of core required courses, the minor in retail studies includes foundational retailing classes in the spring quarter of junior year and a two-quarter class designed around the Art & Science of Merchandising and Retail Innovation in the fall and winter quarters of senior year. The core classes cover topics such as digital marketing, branding, product development, category management, business analytics, supply chain management, e-commerce, and pricing and promotion analysis and digital merchandising.

One of the valuable and unique aspects of the retail studies minor is participation in an internship junior year. This immersive experience gives students insight into the retail industry and potential career options.  The program also offers corporate visits to retailers, visits to conferences and scholarships.

Non-business majors are encouraged to apply for admission to the program during the first or second year to allow time to integrate their course of study in retailing with the requirements in their major field. Business students who have completed the lower-division requirements can enter the program no later than January of  junior year. Students are admitted into the minor at the discretion of the executive director based on multiple criteria including a minimum GPA of 3.3, proven analytical skills, the ability to blend analytical and creative thinking and previous exposure to retail.

Students must complete the following requirements for a minor in retail studies:

Contemporary Business

Busn 70

Financial Accounting

ACTG 11 / ACTG 11A

Communication

COMM 20 / COMM 2 or BUSN 179*

*BUSN 179 is for business students only

Computer Concepts

OMIS 15

Data Analysis

OMIS 40 or

PSYC 40 or

MATH 8/123 or

AMTH 108 or

COMM 110 / COMM 100*

*Prerequisites for Comm 110 are Comm 1 & Comm 2

Technology/Information Systems

COMM 12 / COMM 50 or

OMIS 34 or

ACTG 134 or

SOCI 49/149

Microeconomics

ECON 1

Organization and Management

MGMT 160

Principles of Marketing

MKTG 181

Multi-Channel Retailing*

MKTG 165

*Prerequisites for MKTG 165 are BUSN 70 followed by ACTG 11 as well as MKTG 181.

BUSN 198R*

Senior Seminar 1

MKTG 168* Fall Quarter Only

Senior Seminar 2

MKTG 169* Winter Quarter Only