The School of Engineering confers the degree of bachelor of science with majors in bioengineering, civil engineering, computer science and engineering, web design and engineering, electrical engineering, electrical and computer engineering, general engineering, and mechanical engineering. The specialized bachelor of science programs in civil engineering, computer science and engineering, electrical and computer engineering, electrical engineering, and mechanical engineering are accredited by the Engineering Accreditation Commission of ABET,  http://www.abet.org, and the bachelor of science program in computer science and engineering is also accredited by the Computing Accreditation Commission of ABET, http://www.abet.org . The bachelor of science programs in bioengineering, general engineering, and web design and engineering are not yet accredited by ABET. The engineering school offers minors in engineering, computer science and engineering, construction management, electrical engineering, electrical and computer engineering, aerospace engineering, and mechanical engineering as well as two interdisciplinary minors, one in bioengineering and one in technical innovation, design thinking, and the entrepreneurial mindset. All of the undergraduate engineering programs require students to complete extensive course sequences in mathematics and natural science as well as engineering.

Success in completing these critical course sequences is highly dependent upon having the necessary technical background at each stage. Accordingly, prerequisites for all engineering courses are strictly enforced.

To qualify for the degree of bachelor of science in the School of Engineering, students must complete the minimum number of units specified for the particular major and satisfy the requirements of the undergraduate Core Curriculum and the major. It is possible that one course can satisfy more than one of the core requirements for engineering students.

Critical Thinking & Writing

Advanced Writing

Religion, Theology & Culture 1, 2, and 3

Cultures & Ideas 1 and 2

Cultures & Ideas 3

Mathematics and Natural Science

Second Language

Social Science

Civic Engagement

The civic engagement requirement may be met by one of two options:

Ethics

Diversity

Arts

The arts requirement may be met by one of two options:

Science, Technology & Society

The Science, Technology & Society requirement may be met by one of two options:

Experiential Learning for Social Justice

Pathways

Minor in Aerospace Engineering

The Department of Mechanical Engineering offers a minor in aerospace engineering open to engineering and non-engineering majors. Requirements for the minor are outlined in the Mechanical Engineering section of this chapter.

Minor in Bioengineering

The Department of Bioengineering offers an interdisciplinary minor in bioengineering designed for students who are science majors in the College of Arts and Sciences, students completing prerequisites for medical school, and engineering majors. Requirements for this minor are outlined in the Bioengineering section of this chapter.

Minor in Computer Science and Engineering

The Department of Computer Science and Engineering offers a minor in computer science and engineering open to all undergraduate students. Requirements for the minor are outlined in the Computer Science and Engineering section of this chapter.

Minor in Construction Management

The Civil, Environmental, and Sustainable Engineering Department offers a

minor in construction management open to all undergraduate students. Requirements for the minor are described in the Civil, Environmental, and Sustainable Engineering section of this chapter.

Minor in Electrical Engineering

The Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering offers a minor in electrical engineering open to all undergraduate students.Requirements for the minor are outlined i n the Electrical and Computer Engineering section of this chapter.

Minor in Electrical and Computer Engineering

The Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering offers a minor in electrical and computer engineering open to all undergraduate students. Requirements for the minor are outlined in the Electrical and Computer Engineering section of this chapter.

Minor in Engineering

The School of Engineering offers a minor in general engineering open to all undergraduate students.  Requirements for the minor are outlined in the General Engineering section of this chapter.

Minor in Healthcare Innovation and Design

The Department of Bioengineering offers a minor in Healthcare Innovation and Design open to all undergraduate students interested in contributing to innovations in healthcare. Requirements for this minor are outlined in the Bioengineering section of this chapter.

Minor in Technical Innovation, Design Thinking, and the Entrepreneurial Mindset

The School of Engineering offers a minor in technical innovation, design thinking, and the entrepreneurial mindset open to all undergraduate students. Requirements for the minor are outlined in the General Engineering section of this chapter.

Minor in Mechanical Engineering

The Department of Mechanical Engineering offers a minor in mechanical engineering open to all undergraduate students. Requirements for the minor are outlined in the Mechanical Engineering section of this chapter.